<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Canon of the Bible</title>
      <author><name reg="Davidson, Samuel">Samuel Davidson</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="3">Edition 3</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>September 29, 2009</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">30132</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2009-09-29">September 29,  2009</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Canon of the Bible:</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Its Formation, History, And Fluctuations</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Samuel Davidson, D.D.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Of Halle, And LL.D.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">From the Third Revised and Enlarged Edition.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Peter Eckler Publishing Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1877</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='iii'/><anchor id='Pgiii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
The substance of the present work was written toward the
close of the year 1875 for the new edition of the <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
Britannica</hi>. Having been abridged and mutilated, contrary to
the author's wishes, before its publication there, he resolved to
print it entire. With that view it has undergone repeated revision
with enlargement in different parts, and been made as
complete as the limits of an essay appeared to allow. As nothing
of importance has been knowingly omitted, the writer hopes
it will be found a comprehensive summary of all that concerns
the formation and history of the Bible canon. The place occupied
by it was vacant. No English book reflecting the processes
of results of recent criticism, gives an account of the
canon in both Testaments. Articles and essays upon the subject
there are; but their standpoint is usually apologetic not scientific,
traditional rather than impartial, unreasonably conservative
without being critical. The topic is weighty, involving the consideration
of great questions, such as the inspiration, authenticity,
authority, and age of the Scriptures. The author has tried
to handle it fairly, founding his statements on such evidence as
seemed convincing, and condensing them into a moderate compass.
If the reader wishes to know the evidence, he may find it
in the writer's <hi rend='italic'>Introductions to the Old and New Testaments</hi>,
where the separate books of Scripture are discussed; and in the
late treatises of other critics. While his expositions are capable
of expansion, it is believed that they will not be easily shaken.
He commends the work to the attention of all who have an interest
in the progress of theology, and are seeking a foundation
for their faith less precarious than books however venerable.
</p>

<p>
It has not been the writer's purpose to chronicle phases of
opinion, or to refute what he believes to be error in the newest
hypotheses about the age, authority, and composition of the
books. His aim has been rather to set forth the most correct
view of the questions involved in a history of the canon, whether
it be more or less recent. Some may think that the latest or
most current account of such questions is the best; but that is
not his opinion. Hence, the fashionable belief that much of the
<pb n='iv'/><anchor id='Pgiv'/>
Pentateuch, the Book of Leviticus wholly, with large parts of
Exodus and Numbers, in a word, that all the laws relating to
divine worship, with most of the chronological tables or statistics,
belong to Ezra, who is metamorphosed in fact into the first
Elohist, is unnoticed. Hence, also, the earliest gospel is not
declared to be Mark's. Neither has the author ventured to place
the fourth gospel at the end of the first century, as Ewald and
Weitzsäcker do, after the manner of the old critics; or with
Keim so early as 110-115 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Many evince a restless anxiety to find something novel; and
to depart from well-established conclusions for the sake of originality.
This shows a morbid state of mind. Amid the feverish
outlook for discoveries and the slight regard for what is safe,
conservatism is a commendable thing. Some again desire to return,
as far as they can, to orthodoxy, finding between that extreme
and rationalism a middle way which offers a resting-place
to faith. The numerous changes which criticism presents are
not a symptom of soundness. The writer is far indeed from
thinking that every question connected with the books of Scripture
is finally settled; but the majority undoubtedly are, though
several already fixed by great scholars continue to be opened up
afresh. He does not profess to adopt the phase of criticism
which is fashionable at the moment; it is enough to state what
approves itself to his judgment, and to hold it fast amid the contrarieties
of conjecture or the cravings of curiosity. Present
excrescences or aberrations of belief will have their day and
disappear. Large portions of the Pentateuch will cease to be
consigned to a post-exile time, and the gospels of Matthew and
Luke will again be counted the chief sources of Mark's. It will
also be acknowledged that the first as it now exists, is of much
later origin than the fall of Jerusalem. Nor will there be so
great anxiety to show that Justin Martyr was acquainted with
the fourth gospel, and owed his Logos-doctrine chiefly to it.
The difference of ten or twenty years in the date of a gospel will
not be considered of essential importance in estimating its
character.
</p>

<p>
The present edition has been revised throughout and several
parts re-written. The author hopes that it will be found still
more worthy of the favor with which the first was received.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Introductory.</head>

<p>
As introductory to the following dissertation, I shall explain
and define certain terms that frequently occur
in it, especially <hi rend='italic'>canon</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>apocryphal</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>ecclesiastical</hi>, and the like.
A right apprehension of these will make the observations
advanced respecting the canon and its formation plainer.
The words have not been taken in the same sense by all, a
fact that obscures their sense. They have been employed
more or less vaguely by different writers. Varying ideas
have been attached to them.
</p>

<p>
The Greek original of <hi rend='italic'>canon</hi><note place='foot'>κανών.</note>
means primarily a straight
rod or pole; and metaphorically, what serves to keep a
thing upright or straight, a <hi rend='italic'>rule</hi>. In the New Testament it
occurs in Gal. vi. 16 and 2 Cor. x. 13, 15, 16, signifying in
the former, a measure; in the latter, what is measured, a
<hi rend='italic'>district</hi>. But we have now to do with its ecclesiastical use.
There are three opinions as to the origin of its application
to the writings used by the church. According to Toland,
Whiston, Semler, Baur, and others, the word had originally
the sense of <hi rend='italic'>list</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>catalogue</hi> of books publicly read in
Christian assemblies. Others, as Steiner, suppose that since
the Alexandrian grammarians applied it to collections of
Old Greek authors as <hi rend='italic'>models</hi>
of excellence or <hi rend='italic'>classics</hi>, it
meant <hi rend='italic'>classical</hi> (canonical)
<hi rend='italic'>writings</hi>. According to a third
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
opinion, the term included from the first the idea of a regulating
principle. This is the more probable, because the
same idea lies in the New Testament use of the noun, and
pervades its applications in the language of the early
Fathers down to the time of Constantine, as Credner has
shown.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Zur Geschichte des Kanons</hi>,
pp 3-68.</note> The <q>canon of the church</q> in the Clementine
homilies;<note place='foot'>Clement. Hom. <hi rend='italic'>ap.
Coteler</hi>, vol. i. p. 608.</note> the <q>ecclesiastical
canon,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Stromata</hi>,
vi. 15, p. 803, ed. Potter.</note> and <q>the canon of
the truth,</q> in Clement and Irenæus;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adv.
Hæres.</hi>, i. 95.</note> the <q>canon</q> of the
faith in Polycrates,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ap.</hi> Euseb.
H. E., v. 24.</note> the <foreign rend='italic'>regula fidei</foreign>
of Tertullian,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De præscript. Hæreticorum</hi>,
chs. 12, 13.</note> and the <foreign rend='italic'>libri regulares</foreign>
of Origen,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment.</hi> in
<hi rend='italic'>Mat.</hi> iii. p. 916; ed. Delarue.</note>
imply a <emph>normative principle</emph>. But
we cannot assent to Credner's view of the Greek word for <hi rend='italic'>canon</hi>
being an abbreviation of <q>Scriptures of canon,</q><note place='foot'>γραφαὶ
κανόνος.</note> equivalent to <hi rend='italic'>Scripturæ legis</hi> in Diocletian's
Act<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Monumenta vetera ad Donatistarum
historiam petinentia</hi>, ed. Dupin, p. 168.</note>&mdash;a view too
artificial, and unsanctioned by usage.
</p>

<p>
It is true that the word <hi rend='italic'>canon</hi> was employed by Greek
writers in the sense of a mere <hi rend='italic'>list</hi>; but when it was transferred
to the Scripture books, it included the idea of a regulative
and normal power&mdash;a list of books forming a rule or
law, because the newly-formed Catholic Church required a
standard of appeal in opposition to the Gnostics with their
arbitrary use of sacred writings. There is a lack of evidence
on behalf of its use before the books of the New Testament
had been paralleled with those of the Old in authority and
inspiration.
</p>

<p>
The earliest example of its application to a catalogue of
the Old or New Testament books occurs in the Latin translation
of Origen's homily on Joshua, where the original
seems to have been <q>canon.</q><note place='foot'>κανών.</note>
The word itself is certainly
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
in Amphilochius,<note place='foot'>At the end of the
<hi rend='italic'>Iambi ad Seleucum</hi>, on the books of the New
Testament, he adds, οὐτος ἀψευδέστατος κανὼν ἄν εἴη τῶν θεοπνεύστων γραφῶν.</note>
as well as in Jerome,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prologus galeatus</hi>
in ii. Reg.</note> and Rufinus.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Expos. in
Symb. Apost.</hi>, 37, p. 374, ed. Migne.</note> As
the Latin translation of Origen has <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>canonicus</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>canonizatus</foreign>,
we infer that he used <q>canonical,</q><note place='foot'>κανονικός.</note>
opposed as it is to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>apocryphus</foreign> or
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>secretus</foreign>. The first occurrence of
<q>canonical</q> is in the fifty-ninth canon of the Council of Laodicea, where
it is contrasted with two other Greek words.<note place='foot'>ἰδιωτικός and
ἀκανόνιστος.</note> <q><hi rend='italic'>Canonized</hi>
books,</q><note place='foot'>Κανονιζόμενα.</note> is first used in Athanasius's 39th
festal epistle. The kind of rule which the earliest fathers attributed to the
Scriptures can only be conjectured; it is certain that they
believed the Old Testament books to be a <emph>divine</emph> and <emph>infallible
guide</emph>. But the New Testament was not so considered
till towards the close of the second century when the conception
of a Catholic Church was realized. The latter collection
was not called <hi rend='italic'>Scripture</hi>, or put on a par with the
Old Testament as <hi rend='italic'>sacred</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>inspired</hi>, till
the time of Theophilus of Antioch (about 180 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>)
Hence, Irenæus applies the epithets <hi rend='italic'>divine</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>perfect</hi> to the Scriptures; and Clement
of Alexandria calls them <hi rend='italic'>inspired</hi>.
</p>

<p>
When distinctions were made among the Biblical writings
other words<note place='foot'>Such as ἐνδιάθηκα, ὡρισμένα.</note>
were employed, synonymous with <q>canonized.</q><note place='foot'>κανονιζόμενα
or κεκανονισμένα.</note>
The canon was thus a catalogue of writings forming
a rule of truth, sacred, divine, revealed by God for the
instruction of men. The rule was perfect for its purpose.
</p>

<p>
The word apocryphal<note place='foot'>ἀπόκρυφος.</note>
is used in various senses, which it is
difficult to trace chronologically. Apocryphal books are,&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1st, Such as contain <emph>secret</emph> or <emph>mysterious</emph> things, books of
the higher wisdom. It is thus applied to the Apocalypse
by Gregory of Nyssa.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Orat. de Ordin.</hi>,
vol. ii. p. 44.</note> Akin to this is the second meaning.
</p>

<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>

<p>
2nd, Such as were <emph>kept secret</emph> or withdrawn from public use.
In this sense the word corresponds to the Hebrew
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ganuz</foreign>.<note place='foot'>גנז.
The Jews applied the word <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>genuzim</foreign>
to books withdrawn from public use, whose contents were thought to be out of harmony
with the doctrinal or moral views of Judaism when the canon was
closed. See Fürst's <hi rend='italic'>Der Kanon des alten Testaments</hi>, p. 127, note;
and Geiger's <hi rend='italic'>Urschrift</hi>, p. 201.</note>
So Origen speaking of the story of Susanna. The opposite
of this is <emph>read in public</emph>,<note place='foot'>δεδημοσιευμένα.</note>
a word employed by Eusebius.<note place='foot'>H. E. Il. 23, III. 3-16.</note>
</p>

<p>
3rd, It was used of the secret books of the heretics by
Clement<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Stromata</hi>, lib. iii. p. 1134, ed.
Migne.</note> and Origen,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prolog. ad Cant.,
opp.</hi>, vol. iii. p. 36.</note> with the accessory idea of <emph>spurious</emph>,
<emph>pseudepigraphical</emph>,<note place='foot'>νόθος, ψευδεπίγραφος.</note>
in opposition to the canonical writings
of the Catholic Church. The book of Enoch and similar
productions were so characterized.<note place='foot'>See Suicer's
<hi rend='italic'>Thesaurus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
4th, Jerome applied it to the books in the Septuagint
which are absent from the Hebrew canon, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, to the books
which were <emph>read</emph> in the church, the <emph>ecclesiastical</emph>
ones<note place='foot'>Βιβλία ἀναγινωσκόμενα, libri ecclesiastici.</note> occupying
a rank next to the canonical. In doing so he had
respect to the corresponding Hebrew epithet. This was a
misuse of the word <hi rend='italic'>apocryphal</hi>, which had a prejudicial effect
on the character of the books in after-times.<note place='foot'>In
his epistle to Laeta he uses the epithet in its customary sense, of
books unauthentic, not proceeding from the authors whose names
they bear. <hi rend='italic'>Opp.</hi> vol. i. p. 877, ed. Migne.</note> The word,
which he did not employ in an injurious sense, was adopted
from him by Protestants after the Reformation, who gave it
perhaps a sharper distinction than he intended, so as to imply
a contrast somewhat disparaging to writings which were
publicly read in many churches and put beside the canonical
ones by distinguished fathers. The Lutherans have adhered
to Jerome's meaning longer than the Reformed; but the
decree of the Council of Trent had some effect on both.
The contrast between the canonical and apocryphal writings
was carried to its utmost length by the Westminster divines,
who asserted that the former are inspired, the latter not.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Old Testament Canon From Its Beginning
To Its Close.</head>

<p>
The first important part of the Old Testament put together
as a whole was the Pentateuch, or rather, the
five books of Moses and Joshua. This was preceded by
smaller documents, which one or more redactors embodied in
it. The earliest things committed to writing were probably
<hi rend='italic'>the ten words</hi> proceeding from Moses himself, afterwards enlarged
into the ten commandments which exist at present
in two recensions (Exod. xx., Deut. v.) It is true that we
have the oldest form of the decalogue from the Jehovist not
the Elohist; but that is no valid objection against the antiquity
of the nucleus, out of which it arose. It is also
probable that several legal and ceremonial enactments belong,
if not to Moses himself, at least to his time; as also
the Elohistic list of stations in Numbers xxxiii. To the
same time belongs the song of Miriam in Exodus xv.,
probably consisting of a few lines at first, and subsequently
enlarged; with a triumphal ode over the fall of Heshbon
(Numbers xxi. 27-30). The little poetical piece in Numbers
xxi. 17, 18, afterwards misunderstood and so taken literally,
is post-Mosaic.
</p>

<p>
During the unsettled times of Joshua and the Judges there
could have been comparatively little writing. The song of
Deborah appeared, full of poetic force and fire. The period
of the early kings was characterized not only by a remarkable
development of the Hebrew people and their consolidation
into a national state, but by fresh literary activity.
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
Laws were written out for the guidance of priests and
people; and the political organization of the rapidly growing
nation was promoted by poetical productions in which
spiritual life expressed its aspirations. Schools of prophets
were instituted by Samuel, whose literary efforts tended to
purify the worship. David was an accomplished poet,
whose psalms are composed in lofty strains; and Solomon
may have written a few odes. The building of the temple,
and the arrangements connected with its worship, contributed
materially to a written legislation.
</p>

<p>
During this early and flourishing period appeared the book
of the Wars of Jehovah,<note place='foot'>Num. xxi. 14.</note>
a heroic anthology, celebrating
warlike deeds; and the book of Jashar,<note place='foot'>Joshua x.
12, 13; 2 Sam. i. 18.</note> also poetical.
Jehoshaphat is mentioned as court-annalist to David and
Solomon.<note place='foot'>2 Sam. viii. 16; 1 Kings iv. 3.</note>
Above all, the Elohists now appeared, the first
of whom, in the reign of Saul, was author of annals, beginning
at the earliest time which were distinguished by genealogical
and chronological details as well as systematic
minuteness, by archaic simplicity, and by legal prescriptions
more theoretical than practical. The long genealogical
registers with an artificial chronology and a statement of
the years of men's lives, the dry narratives, the precise accounts
of the gradual enlargement of divine laws, the copious
description of the tabernacle and the institution of divine
worship, are wearisome, though pervaded by a theoretic interest
which looks at everything from a legal point of view.
A second or junior Elohist was less methodical and more
fragmentary, supplying additional information, furnishing
new theocratic details, and setting forth the relation of Israel
to heathen nations and to God. In contrast with his predecessor,
he has great beauty of description, which is
exemplified in the account of Isaac's sacrifice and the history
of Joseph; in picturesque and graphic narratives interspersed
with few reflections. His parallels to the later writer
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
commonly called the Jehovist, are numerous. The third
author, who lived in the time of Uzziah, though more mythological
than the Elohists, was less formal. His stand-point
is prophetic. The third document incorporated with the Elohistic
ones formed an important part of the whole, exhibiting
a vividness which the first lacked; with descriptions of
persons and things from another stand-point. The Jehovist
belonged to the northern kingdom; the Elohists were of
Judah.
</p>

<p>
The state of the nation after Rehoboam was unfavorable
to literature. When the people were threatened and attacked
by other nations, divided among themselves in worship and
all higher interests, rent by conflicting parties, the theocratic
principle which was the true bond of union could not
assert itself with effect. The people were corrupt; their
religious life debased. The example of the kings was
usually prejudicial to political healthiness. Contact with
foreigners as well as with the older inhabitants of the land,
hindered progress. In these circumstances the prophets
were the true reformers, the advocates of political liberty,
expositors of the principles that give life and stability to a
nation. In Judah, Joel wrote prophetic discourses; in
Israel, Amos and Hosea. Now, too, a redactor put together
the Elohistic and Jehovistic documents, making various
changes in them, adding throughout sentences or words
that seemed desirable, and suppressing what was unsuited
to his taste. Several psalm-writers enriched the national
literature after David. Learned men at the court of Hezekiah
recast and enlarged (Proverbs xxv.-xxix.) the national
proverbs, which bore Solomon's name because the
nucleus of an older collection belonged to that monarch.
These literary courtiers were not prophets, but rather scribes.
The book of Job was written, with the exception of Elihu's
later discourses, which were not inserted in it till after the
return from Babylon; and Deuteronomy, with Joshua, was
added to the preceding collection in the reign of Manasseh.
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
The gifted author of Deuteronomy, who was evidently imbued
with the prophetic spirit, completed the Pentateuch,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the five books
of Moses and Joshua, revising the Elohist-Jehovistic
work, and making various additions and alterations.
He did the same thing to the historical books of
Judges, Samuel, and Kings; which received from him their
present form. Immediately before and during the exile
there were numerous authors and compilers. New psalms
appeared, more or less national in spirit. Ezekiel, Jeremiah
and others prophesied; especially an unknown seer who
described the present condition of the people, predicting
their coming glories and renovated worship in strains of far-reaching
import.<note place='foot'>Isaiah, xl.-lxvi.</note>
This great prophet expected the regeneration
of the nation from the pious portion of it, the
prophets in particular, not from a kingly Messiah as Isaiah
did; for the hopes resting on rulers out of David's house
had been disappointed. His aspirations turned to spiritual
means. He was not merely an enthusiastic seer with comprehensive
glance, but also a practical philosopher who set
forth the doctrine of the innocent suffering for the guilty;
differing therein from Ezekiel's theory of individual reward
and punishment in the present world&mdash;a theory out of harmony
with the circumstances of actual life. The very
misfortunes of the nation, and the signs of their return,
excited within the nobler spirits hopes of a brighter future,
in which the flourishing reign of David should be surpassed
by the universal worship of Jehovah. In consequence of
their outward condition, the prophets of the exile were
usually writers, like Ezekiel, not public speakers; and their
announcement of glad tidings could only be transmitted
privately from person to person. This explains in part the
oblivion into which their names fell; so that the author or
redactor of Jeremiah l., li.; the author of chapters xiii.-xiv.
23, xxi. 1-10, xxiv.-xxvii., xxxiv., xxxv., inserted in Isaiah;
and, above all, the Babylonian Isaiah, whom Hitzig improbably
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
identifies with the high-priest Joshua, are unknown.
After the return from Babylon the literary spirit manifested
itself in the prophets of the restoration&mdash;Haggai, Zechariah,
and Malachi&mdash;who wrote to recall their countrymen to a
sense of religious duties; though their ideas were borrowed
in part from older prophets of more original genius. The
book of Esther appeared, to make the observance of the
purim feast, which was of Persian origin, more general in
Palestine. The large historical work comprising the books
of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Chronicles, was compiled partly out
of materials written by Ezra and Nehemiah, partly out of
older historical records which formed a portion of the national
literature. Several temple-psalms were also composed;
a part of the present book of Proverbs; Ecclesiastes,
whose tone and language betray its late origin; and Jonah,
whose diction puts its date after the Babylonian captivity.
The Maccabean age called forth the book of Daniel and
various psalms. In addition to new productions there was
an inclination to collect former documents. To Zechariah's
authentic prophecies were added the earlier ones contained
in chapters ix.-xiv.; and the Psalms were gradually brought
together, being made up into divisions at different times;
the first and second divisions proceeding from one redactor,
the third from another, the fourth and fifth from a still
later. Various writings besides their own were grouped
around the names of earlier prophets, as was the case with
Isaiah and Jeremiah.
</p>

<p>
The literature is more indebted for its best constituents to
the prophetic than to the priestly order, because the prophets
were preachers of repentance and righteousness whose
great aim was to make Israel a Jehovah-worshipping nation
to the exclusion of other gods. Their utterances were
essentially ethical and religious; their pictures of the future
subjective and ideal. There was silently elaborated in their
schools a spiritual monotheism, over against the crude
polytheism of the people generally&mdash;a theocratic ideal inadequately
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
apprehended by gross and sensuous Israel&mdash;Jehovism
simple and sublime amid a sacerdotal worship which
left the heart impure while cleansing the hands. Instead of
taking their stand upon the law, with its rules of worship,
its ceremonial precepts and penalties against transgressors,
the prophets set themselves above it, speaking slightingly
of the forms and customs which the people took for the
whole of religion. To the view of such as were prepared to
receive a faith that looked for its realization to the future,
they helped to create a millennium, in which the worship of
Jehovah alone should become the basis of a universal religion
for humanity. In addition to the prophetic literature
proper, they wrote historical works also. How superior
this literature is to the priestly, appears from a comparison
of the Kings and Chronicles. The subjective underlies the
one; the objective distinguishes the other. Faith in Jehovah,
clothed, it may be in sensible or historical forms,
characterizes the one; reference of an outward order to a
divine source, the other. The sanctity of a people under
the government of a righteous God, is the object of the one;
the sanctity of institutions, that of the other. Even when
the prophets wrote history, <emph>the facts</emph> are subordinate to <emph>the
belief</emph>. Subjective purposes colored their representation
of real events.
</p>

<p>
To them we are indebted for the Messianic idea, the hope
of a better time in which their high ideal of the theocracy
should be realized. With such belief in the future, with
pious aspirations enlivening their patriotism, did they comfort
and encourage their countrymen. The hope, general
or indefinite at first, was afterwards attached to the house of
David, out of which a restorer of the theocracy was expected,
a king pre-eminent in righteousness, and marvelously
gifted. It was not merely a political but a religious hope,
implying the thorough purification of the nation, the extinction
of idolatry, the general spread and triumph of true
religion. The pious wishes of the prophets, often repeated,
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
became a sort of doctrine, and contributed to sustain the
failing spirit of the people. The indefinite idea of a golden
age was commoner than that of a personal prince who
should reign in equity and peace. Neither was part of the
national faith, like the law, or the doctrine of sacrifice; and
but a few of the prophets portrayed a king, in their description
of the period of ideal prosperity.
</p>

<p>
The man who first gave public sanction to a portion of the
national literature was Ezra, who laid the foundation of a
canon. He was the leader in restoring the theocracy after
the exile, <q>a ready scribe in the law of Moses, who had
prepared his heart to seek the law of the Lord and to teach
in Israel statutes and judgments.</q> As we are told that he
brought the book of the law of Moses before the congregation
and read it publicly, the idea naturally arises that he
was the final redactor of the Pentateuch, separating it from
the historical work consisting of Joshua and the subsequent
writings, of which it formed the commencement. Such was
the first canon given to the Jewish Church after its reconstruction&mdash;ready
for temple service as well as synagogue
use. Henceforward the Mosaic book became an authoritative
guide in spiritual, ecclesiastical, and civil matters, as
we infer from various passages in Ezra and Nehemiah and
from the chronicler's own statements in the book bearing
his name. The doings of Ezra with regard to the Scriptures
are deduced not only from what we read of him in the Biblical
book that bears his name, but also from the legend in
the fourth book of Ezdras,<note place='foot'>Chap. xiv. 23-50,
&amp;c. See Hilgenfeld's <hi rend='italic'>Messias Judærorum</hi>,
p. 107.</note> where it is related that he dictated
by inspiration to five ready writers ninety-four books;
the first twenty-four of which he was ordered to publish
openly that the worthy and unworthy might read, but reserved
the last seventy for the wise. Though the twenty-four
books of the Old Testament cannot be attributed to
him, the fact that he copied and wrote portions need not be
questioned. He edited <emph>the law</emph>, making the first canon or
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
collection of books, and giving it an authority which it had
not before. Talmudic accounts associate with him the men
of the great synagogue. It is true that they are legendary,
but there is a foundation of fact beneath the fanciful superstructure.
As to Ezra's treatment of the Pentateuch, or his
specific mode of redaction, we are left for the most part to
conjecture. Yet it is safe to affirm that he added;&mdash;making
new precepts and practices either in place of or beside older
ones. Some things he removed as unsuited to the altered
circumstances of the people; others he modified. He threw
back later enactments into earlier times. It is difficult to
discover all the parts that betray his hand. Some elaborate
priestly details show his authorship most clearly. If his
hand be not visible in Leviticus, chap. xvii.-xxvi.; a writer
not far removed from his time is observable; Ezekiel or
some other. It is clear that some of the portion (xxv. 19-22;
xxvi. 3-45) is much later than the Elohists, and belongs
to the exile or post-exile period. But great difficulty
attaches to the separation of the sources here used; even
after Kayser's acute handling of them. It is also perceptible
from Ezekiel xx. 25, 26, that the clause in Exodus xiii. 15,
<q>but all the first-born of my children I redeem,</q> was
added after the exile, since the prophet shows his unacquaintance
with it. The statute that all which openeth the
womb should be burnt in sacrifice to Jehovah, appeared inhuman
not only to Ezekiel, but to Ezra or his associates in
re-editing the law; and therefore the clause about the redemption
of every first-born male was subjoined. Ezra, a
second Moses in the eyes of the later Jews, did not scruple
to refer to Moses what was of recent origin, and to deal
freely with the national literature. Such was the first
canon&mdash;that of Ezra the priest and scribe.
</p>

<p>
The origin of the great synagogue is noticed in Ezra x.
16, and described more particularly in Nehemiah viii.-x.,
the members being apparently enumerated in x. 1-27; at
least the Megila Jer. (i. 5) and Midrash Ruth (§ 3) speak
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
of an assembly of eighty-five elders, who are probably found
in the last passage. One name, however, is wanting, for
only eighty-four are given; and as Ezra is not mentioned
among them, the conjecture of Krochmal that it has dropped
out of x. 9, may be allowed. Another tradition gives the
number as one hundred and twenty, which may be got by
adding the <q>chief of the fathers</q> enumerated in Ezra viii.
1-14 to the hundred and two heads of families in Ezra ii. 2-58.
Whether the number was the same at the commencement
as afterwards is uncertain. Late Jewish writers,
however, such as Abarbanel, Abraham ben David, Ben
Maimun, &amp;c., speak as if it consisted of the larger number
at the beginning; and have no scruple in pronouncing Ezra
president, rather than Nehemiah.<note place='foot'>See Buxtorf's
<hi rend='italic'>Tiberias</hi>, chap. x., p. 88, &amp;c.; and
Herzfeld's <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
des Volkes Israel</hi>, vol. i. p. 380, &amp;c. Zwölfter Excursus.</note>
</p>

<p>
The oldest extra-biblical mention of the synagogue, is in
the Mishnic treatise <hi rend='italic'>Pirke Aboth</hi>, where it is said, <q>Moses
received the laws from Mount Sinai, and delivered it to
Joshua, Joshua to the elders, the elders to the prophets, and
the prophets delivered it to the men of the great synagogue.
These last spake these words: <q>Be slow in judgment; appoint
many disciples; make a hedge for the law.</q></q><note place='foot'>Chapter
i.</note> In the
Talmudic <hi rend='italic'>Baba Bathra</hi>, their biblical doings are described:
<q>Moses wrote his book, the section about Balaam and job.
Joshua wrote his book and eight verses of the law. Samuel
wrote his book and judges and Ruth. David wrote the
book of Psalms <emph>by</emph> (?)<note place='foot'>על ידי.
Does this mean <emph>for, instead of</emph>, as Bloch understands it?
Waehner inserts, to fill up the sense, <q>some of which, however, were
composed by;</q> but this is far-fetched. See
<hi rend='italic'>Antiquitates Ebræorum</hi>,
p. 13.</note> ten elders, by Adam the first man,
by Melchizedek, by Abraham, by Moses, by Heman, by
Jeduthun, by Asaph, and the three sons of Korah. Jeremiah
wrote his book, the books of Kings and Lamentations.
Hezekiah and his friends wrote Isaiah, Proverbs, Canticles,
and Coheleth; the men of the great synagogue, Ezekiel, the
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
twelve prophets, Daniel and Esther. Ezra wrote his own
book and the genealogies of Chronicles down to himself.</q><note place='foot'>Fol.
15, 1.</note> This passage has its obscurities. What is meant by the
verb <emph>write</emph>!<note place='foot'>פחכ.</note> Does it mean
<emph>composition</emph> and then something
else; the former in the first part of the passage, and <emph>editing</emph>
in the second? Rashi explains it of <emph>composition</emph> throughout,
which introduces absurdity. The most obvious interpretation
is that which understands the verb of <emph>writing</emph> in one
place, and <emph>editing</emph> in the second. But it is improbable that
the author should have used the same word in different
senses, in one and the same passage. Bloch<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Studien
zur Geschichte der Sammlung der althebräischen Literatur</hi>,
p. 127, &amp;c.</note> understands it of <emph>copying</emph> or
<emph>writing out</emph>, a sense that suits the procedure of
the men of the great synagogue in regard to Ezekiel, the
twelve prophets, &amp;c., but is inapplicable to Moses, Joshua,
Samuel, David, Jeremiah, &amp;c. It is probable enough that
the synagogue scribes put into their present form and made
the first authorized copies of the works specified. The
Boraitha, however, is not clear, and may only express the
opinion of a private individual in a confused way. Simon
the Just is said to have belonged to the remnants of the
synagogue. As Ezra is called <q>a ready scribe,</q> and his
labors in connection with the law were important, he may
have organized a body of literary men who should work in
harmony, attending, among other things, to the collection
and preservation of the national literature; or they may
have been an association of patriotic men who voluntarily
rallied round the heads of the new state, to support them in
their fundamental reforms. The company of scribes mentioned
in 1 Maccabees does not probably relate to it.<note place='foot'>vii. 12,
συναγωγὴ γραμματέων, not ἡ συναγωγή.</note> A
succession of priests and scribes, excited at first by the reforming
zeal of one whom later Jews looked upon as a
second Moses, labored in one department of literary work
till the corporation ceased to exist soon after, if not in the
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
time of Simon, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, from about 445
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> till about 200; for
we identify the Simon celebrated in Sirach l. 1-26 with
Simon II., son of the high-priest Onias II., <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 221-202;
not with Simon I., son and successor of the high-priest
Onias I., <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 310-291. Josephus's opinion, indeed, is contrary;
but leading Jewish scholars, such as Zunz, Herzfeld,
Krochmal, Derenbourg, Jost, and Bloch differ from him.
</p>

<p>
To the great synagogue must be referred the compilation
of the second canon, containing Joshua, Judges with Ruth,
Samuel, Kings, Isaiah, Jeremiah with Lamentations, Ezekiel
and the twelve minor prophets. It was not completed prior
to 300 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, because the book of Jonah was not written before.
This work may be called a historical parable composed
for a didactic purpose, giving a milder, larger view of Jehovah's
favor than the orthodox one, that excluded the
Gentiles. Ruth, containing an idyllic story with an unfinished
genealogy attached, meant to glorify the house of
David, and presenting a kindred spirit towards a people
uniformly hated, was appended to Judges; but was subsequently
transferred to the third canon. It was written
immediately after the return from the Babylonian captivity;
for the Chaldaising language points to this date, notwithstanding
the supposed archaisms discovered in it by some.
In like manner, the Lamentations, originally added to Jeremiah,
were afterwards put into the later or third canon.
Joshua, which had been separated from the five books of
Moses with which it was closely joined at first, formed, with
the other historical portion (Judges, Samuel, Kings), the
proper continuation of Ezra's canon. The prophets included
the three greater and twelve minor. With Isaiah's authentic
oracles were incorporated the last twenty-seven chapters,
belonging for the most part to an anonymous prophet of the
exile, besides several late pieces inserted in the first thirty-nine
chapters. Men of prophetic gifts wrote in the name of
distinguished prophets, and put their productions with those
of the latter, or adapted and wrote them over after their own
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
fashion. The fiftieth and fifty-first chapters of Jeremiah
show such over-writing. To Zechariah's authentic oracles
were attached chapters ix.-xiv., themselves made up of two
parts (ix.-xi., xii.-xiv.) belonging to different times and
authors prior to the destruction of the Jewish state by the
Babylonians.
</p>

<p>
The character of the synagogue's proceedings in regard
to the books of Scripture can only be deduced from the conduct
of Ezra himself, as well as the prevailing views and
wants of the times. The scribes who began with Ezra, seeing
how he acted, would naturally follow his example, not hesitating to
revise the text <emph>in substance</emph> as well as form.<note place='foot'>That the
Scribes always adhered to the prohibition to write no religious
laws and ordinances cannot be held, even in the face of the
Talmudic saying, כוחכ הילכוה כשורף חורה (writers of Halacoth are like
a burner of the law). This may apply to the late scribes or bookmen,
not to the earlier. The greater part of Geiger's <hi rend='italic'>Urschrift</hi>
is based on the opposite idea. As the reverence for former scholars increased,
the Talmudic saying might be accepted. See <hi rend='italic'>Temura</hi>, 14 b.</note>
They did not refrain from changing what had been written,
or from inserting fresh matter. Some of their novelties can
be discerned even in the Pentateuch. Their chief work,
however, related to the <emph>form</emph> of the text. They put into a
proper form and state the text of the writings they studied,
perceiving less need for revising the <emph>matter</emph>. What they did
was in good faith, with honest intention.
</p>

<p>
The prophetic canon ended with Malachi's oracles. And
it was made sometime after he prophesied, because the
general consciousness that the function ceased with him required
a considerable period for its growth. The fact that
it included Jonah and Ruth brings the completion after 300
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, as already stated. There are no definite allusions to it
till the second century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> Daniel speaks of a passage in
Jeremiah being in <q>the books</q> or <q>writings;</q><note place='foot'>Chapter
ix. 2.</note> and the
prologue of Jesus Sirach presupposes its formation. Such
was the second canon, which had been made up gradually
(444-290 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>)
</p>

<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>

<p>
Another view of the collection in question has been taken
by various scholars. According to a passage in the second
book of Maccabees, the second canon originated with Nehemiah,
who <q>gathered together the acts of the kings and the
prophets and (psalms) of David, and the epistles of the
kings concerning the holy gifts.</q><note place='foot'>Chapter
ii. 13.</note> These words are obscure.
They occur in a letter purporting to be sent by the Sanhedrim
at Jerusalem to the Jews in Egypt, which contains
apocryphal things; a letter which assigns to Nehemiah the
merit of various arrangements rather belonging to Ezra. It
is difficult to understand the meaning of <q>the epistles of the
kings concerning the offerings.</q> If they were the documents
of heathen or Persian kings favorable to the rebuilding
of Jerusalem and its temple, would they not have been
rejected from a collection of sacred books belonging to the
chosen people? They might perhaps have been adopted
had they been interwoven with the holy books themselves,
like portions of Ezra and Nehemiah; but they could not
have formed a distinct part of the national literature, because
they were foreign and heathen. Again, <q>the psalms of
David</q> cannot have existed in the time of Nehemiah, if the
phrase includes the whole collection. It may perhaps refer
to the first three divisions of the book, as Herzfeld thinks;
but these contain many odes which are not David's; while
earlier ones belong to the last two divisions of the Psalm-book.
In like manner, <q>the prophets</q> could not all have
belonged to this canon; neither Malachi, who was later, nor
Jonah. The account will not bear strict examination, and
must be pronounced apocryphal. Nehemiah was a statesman,
not a priest or scribe; a politician, not a literary man.
It is true that he may have had assistants, or committed the
work to competent hands; but this is conjectural. The account
of his supposed canon hardly commends itself by inherent
truthfulness or probability, though it is accepted by
Ewald and Bleek.
</p>

<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>

<p>
When the great synagogue ceased, there was an interval
during which it is not clear whether the sacred books were
neglected, except by private individuals; or whether they
were studied, copied, and collected by a body of scribes.
Perhaps the scribes and elders of the Hasmonæan time were
active at intervals in this department. The institution of
a senate by Judas Maccabaeus is supposed to be favored by
2 Maccabees (chapter i. 10-ii. 18); but the passage furnishes
poor evidence of the thing. Judas is there made to
write to Egypt in the year of the Seleucidae 188, though he
died thirty-six years before, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, 152. Other places have
been added as corroborative, viz., 2 Maccab. iv. 44, xi. 27;
1 Maccab. vii. 33. Some go so far as to state that Jose ben
Joeser was appointed its first president at that time. The
Midrash in Bereshith Rabba (§ 65) makes him one of the
sixty Hassidim who were treacherously murdered by Alcimus;
but this is neither in the first book of the Maccabees
(chapter vii.) nor in Josephus,<note place='foot'>Antiq.
xii. 10, 1.</note> and must be pronounced
conjectural. It is impossible to fix the exact date of Jose
ben Joeser in the Hasmonean period. Pirke Aboth leaves
it indefinite. Jonathan, Judas Maccabaeus's successor,
when writing to the Lacedaemonians, speaks of the <foreign rend='italic'>gerusia</foreign>
or senate as well as <emph>the people</emph> of the Jews; whence we learn
that the body existed as early as the time of Judas.<note place='foot'>Josephus's
Antiq., xiii. 5, 8; 1 Maccab., xii. 35.</note> Again,
Demetrius writes to Simon, as also to <emph>the elders</emph> and <emph>nation</emph>
of the Jews.<note place='foot'>1 Maccab., xiii. 36.</note>
After Jonathan and Simon, it may have been
suspended for a while, in consequence of the persecution
and anarchy prevailing in Judea; till the great Sanhedrim
at Jerusalem succeeded it, under Hyrcanus I. Though the
traces of a senate in the Maccabaean epoch are slight, the
Talmud countenances its existence.<note place='foot'>Sota, 24
a.</note> We believe that it was
earlier than Judas Maccabaeus. Of its constitution nothing
is known; but it was probably aristocratic. The Hasmonean
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
prince would naturally exert a commanding influence
over it. The great synagogue had been a kind of democratic
council, consisting of scribes, doctors or teachers, and
priests.<note place='foot'>מבינים, Nehemiah viii. 3.</note>
Like their predecessors of the great synagogue,
the Hasmonæan elders revised the text freely, putting into
it explanatory or corrective additions, which were not always
improvements. The way in which they used the book of
Esther, employing it as a medium of Halachite prescription,
shows a treatment involving little idea of sacredness attaching
to the Hagiographa.
</p>

<p>
We are aware that the existence of this body is liable to
doubt, and that the expressions belonging to it in Jewish
books, whether elders or <foreign rend='italic'>gerusia</foreign>, have been applied to
the great synagogue or to the Sanhedrim at Jerusalem, or even
to the elders of any little town or hamlet; but it is difficult
to explain all on that hypothesis, without attributing confusion
to the places where they occur. If the body in
question be not allowed, an interval of about sixty years
elapsed between the great synagogue and the Sanhedrim, during
which the hagiographical writings were comparatively
neglected, though literary activity did not cease. No authoritative
association, at least, dealt with them. This is improbable.
It is true that we read of no distinguished teachers in
the interval, except Antigonus of Socho, disciple of Simon
the Just; but the silence can hardly weigh against a reasonable
presumption. One thing is clear, viz., that Antigonus
did not reach down to the time of the first pair that presided
over the Sanhedrim.
</p>

<p>
The contents of the third canon, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Psalms, Proverbs,
Job, Canticles, Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Chronicles, the formation of which we assign to the Hasmonæan
gerusia, were multifarious, differing widely from
one another in age, character, and value&mdash;poetical, prophetic,
didactic, historical. Such as seemed worthy of preservation,
though they had not been included in the second canon,
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
were gathered together during the space of an hundred and
fifty years. The oldest part consisted of psalms supposed
to belong to David. The first psalm, which contains within
itself traces of late authorship, was prefixed as an introduction
to the whole collection now put into the third canon.
Next to the Psalms were Proverbs, Job, Canticles, which,
though non-prophetic and probably excluded on that account
from the second canon, must have existed before the
exile. Enriched with the latest additions, they survived the
national disasters, and claimed a place next to the Psalms.
They were but a portion of the literature current in and
after the 5th century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, as may be inferred from the epilogue
to Ecclesiastes, and the Wisdom of Sirach. The
historical work compiled by the chronicle-writer was separated,
Ezra being put first as the most important part, and
referring also to the church of the 6th and 5th centuries
whose history had not been written. The Chronicles themselves
were placed last, being considered of less value than
the first part, as they contained the summary of a period
already described, though with numerous adaptations to
post-exile times. The youngest portion consisted of the
book of Daniel, not written till the Maccabean period (between
170 and 160 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>);<note place='foot'>Talmudic
tradition, which attributes the redaction of the book to
the men of the great synagogue who are said to have acted under the
influence of the divine spirit, separates the three apocryphal pieces
from the rest; but this arose from the desire of discountenancing the
idea that the work consists of romance and legend. Such later tradition
took curious ways of justifying the canonicity of Daniel and the
redaction of it by the great synagogue, <hi rend='italic'>ex gr.</hi>, the assumption that
the second part arose out of a series of unconnected
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Megiloth</foreign> which
were not reduced to chronological order. Still the Midrash maintains
that Daniel, or the person writing in his name, was no prophet, like
Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, but a man of visions, an <emph>apocalyptist</emph>.
It was a general belief, that <emph>visions</emph> had come into the place of
<emph>prophecy</emph> when the book appeared. The Greek translation could not have
been long after the original, because it is used in the First Book of
Maccabees. The interval between the Hebrew and the Greek was inconsiderable.
The translator not only departed from, but added to,
the original, inserting such important pieces as the Prayer of Azarias,
the Song of the Three Children, the history of Susanna, and that of
Bel and the Dragon. Whether any of these had been written before
is uncertain. Most of the traditions they embody were probably reduced
to writing by the translator, and presented in his peculiar style.
The assertion, that Josephus was unacquainted with these additions is
hazardous, since the way in which he speaks of Daniel's fame (Antiq.
x. 11, 7), and especially of <emph>the books</emph> he wrote (τὰ βιβλία), supposes
some relation to them. Elsewhere he speaks of <emph>one book</emph> (x. 10, 4;
xi. 8, 5), where he may have thought of the canonical part.</note>
and probably of several Psalms
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
(44, 60, 74, 75, 76, 79, 80, 83, 89, 110, 118) which were inserted
in different places of the collection to make the whole
number 150. These late odes savor of the Maccabean time;
and are fitly illustrated by the history given in the first
book of Maccabees. The list continued open; dominated by
no stringent principle of selection, and with a character
somewhat indefinite. It was called <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>c'tubim</foreign>,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, writings<note place='foot'>פתוביס,
translated by the Greek ἁγιόγραφα, hagiographa.</note> a
general epithet suited to the contents.
</p>

<p>
Several books put into the third canon,&mdash;as Job, Proverbs,
the greater number of the Psalms, &amp;c.,&mdash;existed when the
second was made. But the latter collection was pre-eminently
<emph>prophetic</emph>; and it was that idea of the origin and
contents of the books in it which regulated its extent.
Bloch's supposition that the parts of the third collection then
existing were not looked upon as holy, but merely as productions
embodying human wisdom, and were therefore
excluded, is improbable. We do not think that an alteration
of opinion about them in the course of a century or
more, by which they became divine and holy instead of
human, is a satisfactory explanation. The Psalms of David
and the book of Job must have been as highly esteemed in
the period of the great synagogue's existence as they were
at a later time. Other considerations besides the divinity
and holiness of books contributed to their introduction into
a canon. Ecclesiastes was taken into the third collection
because it was attributed to Solomon. The Song of Songs
was understood allegorically,&mdash;a fact which, in addition to
its supposed Solomonic authorship, determined its adoption.
And even after their canonical reception, whether by the
great synagogue or another body, the character of books
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
was canvassed. It was so with Ecclesiastes, in spite of the
<emph>supposed</emph> sanction it got from the great synagogue contained
in the epilogue, added, as some think, by that body to attest
the sacredness of the book.<note place='foot'>It has
been thought that the phrase פעלי אמפות in the ninth verse
alludes to the great council or synagogue. This conjecture is plausible
on various grounds. The reasons for attributing the epilogue to
a later time than the writer of the book appear to be stronger than
those assigning it to the original author. The 13th and 14th verses
in particular, are unlike Coheleth.</note>
</p>

<p>
While the third canon was being made, the soferim, as
the successors of the prophets, were active as before; and
though interpretation was their chief duty, they must have
revised and corrected the sacred books to some extent. We
need not hesitate to allow that they sometimes arranged
parts, and even added matter of their own. In the time of the
canon's entire preparation, they and the priests, with writers
and scholars generally, redacted the national literature, excluding
or sanctioning such portions of it as they thought fit.
</p>

<p>
At this time appeared the present five-fold partition of the
Psalms, preceded as it had been by other divisions, the last
of which was very similar to the one that became final.
Several inscriptions and historical notices were prefixed.
The inscriptions, however, belong to very different times,
their historical parts being usually older than the musical;
and date from the first collection to the period of the Hasmonean
college, when the final redaction of the entire
Psalter took place. Those in the first three books existed
at the time when the latter were made up; those in the last
two were prefixed partly at the time when the collections
themselves were made, and partly in the Maccabean age.
How often they are out of harmony with the poems themselves,
needs no remark. They are both traditional and
conjectural.
</p>

<p>
The earliest attestation of the third canon is that of the
prologue to Jesus Sirach (130 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>), where not only
<emph>the law
and the prophets</emph> are specified, but <q>the other books of the
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
fathers,</q> or <q>the rest of the books.</q><note place='foot'>τὰ
ἀλλα πάτρια βιβλία; τὰ λοιπὰ τῶν βιβλίων. The younger Sirach
does not use γραφαὶ, which would have been a proper translation of
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>c'tubim</foreign>.
Does not this ἀλλα imply the non-application of the specific
title <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>c'tubim</foreign>
to the hagiographa at that time, and therefore the idea
that the third canon was still open?</note> No information is
given as to its extent, or the particular books included.
They may have been for the most part the same as the
present ones. The passage does not show that the third list
was closed. The better writings of the fathers, such as
tended to learning and wisdom, are not excluded by the
definite article. In like manner, neither Philo nor the New
Testament gives exact information as to the contents of the
division in question. Indeed, several books, Canticles,
Esther, Ecclesiastes, are unnoticed in the latter. The argument
drawn from Matthew xxiii. 35, that the Chronicles
were then the last book of the canon, is inconclusive; as
the Zechariah there named was probably different from the
Zechariah in 2 Chronicles xxiv. None of these witnesses
proves that the third canon was finally closed.
</p>

<p>
A more definite testimony respecting the canon is given
by Josephus towards the end of the first century <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> <q>For
we have not an innumerable multitude of books among us, ...
but only twenty-two books, which contain the
records of all the past times; which are justly believed to
be divine. And of them five belong to Moses....
But as to the time from the death of Moses till the reign of
Artaxerxes, king of Persia, the prophets who were after
Moses wrote down what was done in their times in thirteen
books. The remaining four books contain hymns to God
and precepts for the conduct of human life. It is true our
history has been written since Artaxerxes very particularly,
but has not been esteemed of the like authority with the
former by our forefathers, because there has not been an
exact succession of prophets since that time: and how
firmly we have given credit to these books of our own nation
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
is evident by what we do; for during so many ages as
have already passed, no one has been so bold as either to
add anything to them, to take anything from them, or to
make any change in them; but it has become natural to all
Jews immediately and from their very birth, to esteem these
books to contain divine doctrines, and to persist in them, and if occasion
be, willingly to die for them.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra Apion</hi>,
i. 8.</note> This list
agrees with our present canon, showing that the Palestinian
Jews were tolerably unanimous as to the extent of the collection.
The thirteen prophets include Job; the four lyric
and moral books are Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes and
Canticles.
</p>

<p>
It is not likely that the Hasmonæan senate had a long existence.
It was replaced by the Sanhedrim, a more definite
and state institution, intended as a counter-balance to the
influence of the Hasmonæan princes. The notices of the
latter reach no further back than Hyrcanus I., <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, about
135 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi><note place='foot'>In Maaser Sheni,
Sota 24. 1, the duumvirate or suggoth, consisting
of the president, Nasi, and vice-president, Ab-beth-din, are referred
to Hyrcanus's creation. Zunz affirms that it originated in the time of
Simon, son of Mattathias, 142 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note>
Josephus speaks of it under Hyrcanus II.<note place='foot'>Antiq., xiv., 9.</note> It
cannot be referred to an earlier period than Hyrcanus I.
Frankel<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Der gerichtliche Beweis</hi>,
p. 68.</note> indeed, finds a notice of it in 2 Chronicles xix. 8,
11; but the account there is indistinct, and refers to the
great synagogue. The compiler having no certain information
about what was long past, transfers the origin of the
court he speaks of to Jehoshaphat, in order to glorify the
house of David. It is impossible to date the Sanhedrim,
with Frankel, in the Grecian era, in which case it must have
been dissolved during the Maccabean insurrection, and
afterwards reconstructed; it was not constituted till about
130 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> Whether it was modeled after the great synagogue
or the Hasmonæan senate, is uncertain. The idea of it may
have been suggested by the latter rather than the former,
for its basis was aristocratic. The Hasmonæan <foreign rend='italic'>gerusia</foreign>
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
must have been less formal and definite than the Sanhedrim;
though the latter arose before the family ceased to be in
power, and differed materially from its predecessor. It continued
from 130 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> till
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 180, surviving the terrible
disasters of the nation.<note place='foot'>The Sanhedrim
<emph>properly so called</emph> ceased under R. Judah I., Ha-Nasi,
when the council of seventy members which sat at Sepphoris before
his patriarchate, transferred its privileges to him, on his removal
to that place. The court was then merged in the patriarch.</note>
</p>

<p>
The closing of the third canon cannot be assigned, with
Bloch, to the great synagogue. If the college ceased with
or before Simon, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, about 200-192, and the work of Daniel
did not appear till about 170 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, twenty years at least
intervened between the extinction of the great synagogue
and Daniel's book. This holds good, whether we assume,
with Krochmal, the synagogue's <emph>redaction</emph> of the work,&mdash;more
correctly the putting together of the independent parts
of which <emph>it is said</emph> to be composed; or equally so, if the taking
of it into the canon as a book already completed, be attributed
to the same body. But we are unable to see that
Krochmal's reasoning about the synagogue putting Daniel's
work together and one of the members writing the book of
Esther is probable.
</p>

<p>
In like manner, Maccabean psalms are adverse to the
hypothesis that the great synagogue completed the third
canon. In consequence of these late productions, it is impossible
to assert that the men of the synagogue were the
redactors of the Psalter as it is. It is true that the collection
was made before the Chronicles and many other books
of the hagiographical canon; but the <emph>complete</emph> Psalter did
not appear till the Maccabean period. The canon, however,
was not considered to be finally closed in the first century
before and the next after Christ. There were doubts about
some portions. The book of Ezekiel gave offence, because
some of its statements seemed to contradict the law. Doubts
about others were of a more serious nature; about Ecclesiastes,
the Canticles, Esther, and the Proverbs. The first
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
was impugned because it had contradictory passages and a
heretical tendency; the second, because of its worldly and
sensual tone; Esther for its want of religiousness; and
Proverbs on account of inconsistencies. This scepticism
went far to procure the exclusion of the suspected works
from the canon, and their relegation to the class of the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>genuzim</foreign>.<note place='foot'>ננוזים
literally concealed, withdrawn from public use.</note>
But it did not prevail. Hananiah, son of Hezekiah,
son of Garon, about 32 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, is said to have reconciled
the contradictions and quieted the doubts.<note place='foot'>See Fürst's
<hi rend='italic'>Der Kanon des alten Testaments, u.s.w.</hi> pp. 147, 148.</note>
But these traces of resistance to the fixity of the canon were not the last.
They reappeared about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 65, as we learn from the
Talmud,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Tract. Sabbat.</hi> ch. i.</note>
when the controversy turned mainly upon the canonicity
of Ecclesiastes, which the school of Shammai, who had
the majority, opposed; so that the book was probably excluded.<note place='foot'>Because
of its profane spirit and Epicurean ideas; see Adoyot v. 3.</note>
The question emerged again at a later synod at
Jabneh or Jamnia, when R. Eleasar ben Asaria was chosen
patriarch, and Gamaliel the second, deposed. Here it was
decided, not unanimously however, but by a majority of
Hillelites, that Ecclesiastes and the Song of Songs <q>pollute
the hands,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, belong properly to the
Hagiographa.<note place='foot'>Yadayim v. 3.</note> This
was about 90 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi><note place='foot'>See Graetz's
<hi rend='italic'>Kohelet</hi>, pp. 162, 163.</note>
Thus the question of the canonicity of
certain books was discussed at two synods.
</p>

<p>
Passages in the Talmud have been adduced to show that
the Shammaite objections to the canonicity of Ecclesiastes
<q>were overruled by the positive declaration from the 72
elders, <emph>being a testimony anterior to the Christian era</emph> that
Coheleth is canonical; but they do not support the opinion.</q><note place='foot'><p>The
sages wished to pronounce Coheleth apocryphal, because its
statements are contradictory. And why have they not declared it
apocryphal? Because it begins with words of the law, and ends with
words of the law, for it opens with the words <q>What advantage has
man in all his labor wherewith he labors under the sun?</q> &amp;c.,
&amp;c.&mdash;Sabbat. 30 b.
</p>
<p>
So also in the Midrash: <q>The sages wished to pronounce Coheleth
apocryphal,</q> &amp;c., &amp;c.&mdash;Vayyikra rabba 161 b.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>

<p>
<q>The sages</q> referred to in the treatise Sabbat and elsewhere
is a vague expression, resting apparently on no historic
tradition&mdash;a mere opinion of comparatively late date. If it
refer to the Jerusalem synod <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 65, the Hillelites were
simply outnumbered there by the Shammaites. The matter
was debated hastily, and determined for the time by a
majority. But the synod at Jamnia consisted of 72 persons;
and a passage in the treatise Yadayim refers to it.<note place='foot'>R. Simeon
ben Asai said, <q>I have received it from the mouth of
the 72 elders in the day that R. Eleasar ben Asaria was appointed
elder, that the Song of Songs and Coheleth pollute the hands.</q>&mdash;Yadayim
v. 3.</note> The
testimony of the 72 elders to whom R. Simeon ben Asai
here alludes, so far from belonging to an anti-christian era,
belongs to a date about 90 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> And the fact that the synod
at Jamnia took up again a question already debated at
Jerusalem <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 65, proves that no final settlement of the
canon had taken place before. The canon was virtually
settled at Jamnia, where was confirmed what R. Akiba said
of the Canticles in his usual extravagant way: <q>No day in
the whole history of the world is of so much worth as the
one in which the Song of Songs was given to Israel; for all
the Scriptures are holy; but the Song of Songs is most
holy.</q><note place='foot'>This language was
based on a figurative interpretation of the Song.
One who said, <q>Whoever reads such writings as Sirach and the
later books loses all part in everlasting life,</q> can have no weight.
He outheroded the Palestinian tradition respecting the Jewish productions
of later origin, which merely affirms that they <q>do not pollute
the hands.</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Toss. Yadayim</hi>, c. 2)</note>
As the Hagiographa were not read in public, with
the exception of Esther, opinions of the Jewish rabbins
might still differ about Canticles and Ecclesiastes, even
after the synod of Jamnia.
</p>

<p>
In opposition to these remarks, it is strenuously argued
by Bloch that neither the passage in the Mishnic treatise
Yadayim, nor any other, refers to the <emph>canonical character</emph> of
the books to which Jewish elders raised several objections.
But his arguments are more vehement than valid. Anxious
to assign the final settlement of the entire canon to an
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
authoritative body like the great synagogue, he affirms that
all parties were united in opinion about the time of Christ,&mdash;Assiim,
Perushim, and Zeddukim; Shammaites and Hillelites.
But it requires more than his ingenuity to explain
away the meaning of Yadayim 3, 5, Adoyot v. 3, Sabbat 1.
To what did such diversity of opinion relate, if not to the
canonical character of the books? A specific answer to the
question is not given by the learned writer,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Studien
zur Geschichte, u. s. w.</hi>, p. 150, &amp;c.</note> who is too eager
in his endeavor to attribute the settlement of the third canon
to the great synagogue, and to smooth away all diversities
of opinion about several books, after that time, as if none
could afterwards question the authoritative settlement by
that body. He will not even allow a wider canon to the
Alexandrian Jews than that of their Palestinian brethren,
though he cannot but admit that the former read and highly
esteemed various apocryphal books because of their <emph>theocratic</emph>
character. Surely the practical use of writings is an evidence
of their canonicity as strong as theoretical opinions.
</p>

<p>
The doubts about several books to which we have alluded,
some of which Hananiah is said to have resolved in his old
age, imply a diligent study of the national literature, if not
a revision of the text; and the Tannaite college at Jabneh
must have cared for the same things, as it had to deal with
similar objections. After the last canon was made more
than a century anterior to the Christian era, the text was
not considered inviolate by the learned Jews; it received
subsequent modifications and interpolations. The process
of redaction had not ceased before the time of Christ. This
was owing, among other causes, to the state of parties
among the Jews, as well as the intrusion of Greek literature
and culture, whose influence the Palestinian Jews themselves
were not able altogether to withstand. When Jeremiah
accused the Scribes of falsifying the law by their
lying pen (viii. 8), it may be inferred that the same process
took place afterwards; that offensive things were removed,
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
and alterations made continuously down to the close of the
canon, and even after. The corrections consisted of additions
and changes of letters, being indicated in part by the
most ancient versions and the traditions of the Jews themselves
who often knew what stood in the text at first, and
why it was altered. They are also indicated by the nature
of the passage itself viewed in the light of the state of religion
at the time. Here, sober judgment must guard against
unnecessary conjectures. Some changes are apparent, as
the plural <emph>oaks</emph> in Genesis xiii. 18, xiv. 13, xviii. 1, Deuteronomy
xi. 30, for the singular <emph>oak</emph>; and the plural <emph>gods</emph> in
Exodus xxxii. 4, for the singular <emph>god</emph>. So 2 Sam. Vii. 23,
(comp. 1 Chron. xvii. 21, and LXX);<note place='foot'>Geiger's
<hi rend='italic'>Urschrift</hi>, p. 288.</note> and Deuteronomy
xxxii. 8,<note place='foot'>See De Goeje in the <hi rend='italic'>Theologisch
Tijdschriff Jaargang II.</hi> (1868)
p. 179, &amp;c.</note> have been altered. Popper and Geiger have
probably assumed too much correction on the part of the
Scribes and others; though they have drawn attention to
the subject in the spirit of original criticism.
</p>

<p>
Jewish literature began to degenerate after the captivity,
and it continued to do so. It leaned upon the past more and
more, having an external and formal character with little
of the living soul. The independence of their religious
literature disappeared with the national independence of the
Jews; and the genius of the people was too exclusive to receive
much expansion from the spirit of nations with whom
they came in contact. In such circumstances, amid the
general consciousness of present misfortune which the hope
of a brighter future could not dispel, and regretful retrospects
of the past tinged with ideal splendor, the exact time
of drawing a line between books that might be included in
the third division of the canon must have been arbitrary.
In the absence of a normal principle to determine selection,
the productions were arbitrarily separated. Not that they
were badly adjusted. On the contrary, the canon as a whole
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
was settled wisely. Yet the critical spirit of learned Jews
in the future could not be extinguished by anticipation.
The canon was not really settled for all time by a synodical
gathering at Jamnia; for Sirach was added to the Hagiographa
by some rabbins about the beginning of the 4th
century;<note place='foot'>Zunz's <hi rend='italic'>Die
gottesdienstlichen Vorträge</hi>, pp. 101, 102.</note>
while Baruch circulated long in Hebrew, and was
publicly read on the day of atonement in the third century,
according to the Apostolic constitutions.<note place='foot'>V. 20, p. 124,
ed. Ueltzen.</note> These two books
were in high repute for a considerable time, possessing a
kind of canonical credit even among the learned Jews of
Palestine. Rab, Jochanan, Elasar, Rabba bar Mare, occasionally
refer to Sirach in the way in which the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>c'tubim</foreign> were
quoted: the writer of Daniel used Baruch; and the translator
of Jeremiah put it into Greek.
</p>

<p>
If it be asked on what principle books were admitted into
the canon, a single answer does not suffice. One and the
same criterion did not determine the process at all times.
The leading principle with which the first canon-makers set
out was to collect all the documents of Hebrew antiquity.
This seems to have guided Ezra, if not the great synagogue
after him. The nation, early imbued with the theocratic
spirit and believing itself the chosen of God, was favorably
inclined towards documents in which that standpoint was
assumed. The legal and ethical were specially valued.
The prophetic claimed a divine origin; the lyric or poetic
touched and elevated the ideal faculty on which religion
acts. But the leading principle which actuated Ezra and
the great synagogue was gradually modified, amid the growing
compass of the national literature and the consciousness
that prophecy ceased with Malachi. When the latest part
of the canon had to be selected from a literature almost contemporaneous,
regard was had to such productions as resembled
the old in spirit. Orthodoxy of contents was the
dominant criterion. But this was a difficult thing, for various
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
works really anonymous, though wearing the garb of
old names and histories, were in existence, so that the
boundary of the third part became uncertain and fluctuating.
</p>

<p>
The principle that actuated Ezra in making the first canon
was a religious and patriotic one. From his treatment of
the oldest law books we infer that he did not look upon
them as inviolable. Venerable they were, and so far sacred;
but neither perfect nor complete for all time. In his view
they were not unconditionally authoritative. Doubtless
they had a high value as the productions of inspired lawgivers
and men of a prophetic spirit; but the redaction to
which he submitted them shows no superstitious reverence.
With him <emph>canonical</emph> and <emph>holy</emph> were not identical. Nor does
the idea of an <emph>immediate, divine</emph> authority appear to have
dominated the mind of the great synagogue in the selection
of books. Like Ezra, these scholars reverenced the productions
of the prophets, poets, and historians to whom their
countrymen were indebted in the past for religious or political
progress; but they did not look upon them as the
offspring of unerring wisdom. How could they, while
witnessing repetitions and minor contradictions in the books
collected?
</p>

<p>
The same remarks apply to the third canon. <emph>Direct divinity</emph>
of origin was not the criterion which determined the
reception of a book into it; but the character and authorship
of the book. Did it breathe the old spirit, or proceed
from one venerated for his wisdom? Was it like the old
orthodox productions; or did it bear the name of one renowned
for his piety and knowledge of divine things? The
stamp of antiquity was necessary in a certain sense; but the
theocratic spirit was the leading consideration. Ecclesiastes
was admitted because it bore the name of Solomon; and
Daniel's apocalyptic writings, because veiled under the name
of an old prophet. New psalms were taken in because of
their association with much older ones in the temple service.
Yet the first book of Maccabees was excluded, though written
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
in Hebrew. It is still more remarkable that Sirach was
put among the external productions; but this was owing
not so much to its recent origin, for it is older than the book
of Daniel, as to its being an apparent echo of the Proverbs,
and therefore unnecessary. Yet it was long after assigned
to the Hagiographa, and quoted as such by several rabbis.
Baruch was also left out, though it is as old as Daniel, if
not older; and professes to have been written by Jeremiah's
friend, in Babylon.
</p>

<p>
That redactors dealt freely with the text of the second
and third canons especially, without a superstitious belief
in its sacredness, is apparent from the double recension
which existed when the Egyptian Jews translated the books
into Greek. If the one that formed the basis of the Alexandrian
version be less correct than the Palestinian in the
majority of instances, it is still superior in many. The
differences between them, often remarkable, prove that those
who had most to do with the books did not guard them as
they would have done had they thought them infallibly inspired.
Palestinians and Alexandrians subjected the text
to redaction; or had suffered it to fall into a state inconsistent
with the assumption of its supernatural origin. At a
much later period, the Masoretes reduced to one type all existing
copies of their Scriptures, introducing an uniformity
imperatively demanded in their opinion by multiplied discrepancies.
</p>

<p>
Whatever divine character the reflecting attributed to the
canonical books, it must have amounted to the same thing as
that assigned to human attributes and physical phenomena&mdash;a
divinity resulting from the over-leaping of second
causes, in the absence of inductive philosophy. Here the
imperfection conditioned by the nature of the created cannot
be hid. Yet the books may be truly said to have contained
the word of God.
</p>

<p>
Of the three divisions, <emph>the Law</emph> or Pentateuch was most
highly venerated by the Jews. It was the first translated
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
into Greek; and in Philo's view was inspired in a way
peculiar to itself. <emph>The Prophets</emph>, or second division, occupied
a somewhat lower place in their estimation, but were read
in the public services as the law had been before. The
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>c'tubim</foreign>,
or third division, was not looked upon as equal to the
Prophets in importance: only the five Megiloth were publicly
read. The three parts of the collection present the
three gradations of sanctity which the books assumed successively
in Israelite estimation. A certain reverence was
attached to all as soon as they were made canonical; but
the reverence was not of equal height, and the supposed
authority was proportionally varied.<note place='foot'>Dillmann, in
the <hi rend='italic'>Jahrbücher für deutsche Theologie, dritter Band</hi>,
p. 422.</note> The consciousness
of prophetism being extinct soon after the return from
Babylon, was a genuine instinct. With the extinction of
the Jewish state the religious spirit almost evaporated.
The idealism which the old prophets proclaimed in contrast
with the symbolic religion of the state gave place to the
forms and an attachment to the <emph>written</emph> law. Religion came
to be a thing of the understanding, the subject of learned
treatment; and its essence was reduced to dogmas or precepts.
Thus it ceased to be a spiritual element in which
the heart had free scope for its highest aspirations. In
addition to all, a foreign metaphysical theology, the Persian
doctrine of spirits, was introduced, which seemed to enlarge
the sphere of speculation, but really retarded the free exercise
of the mind. As the external side of religion had been
previously directed to the performance of good works, this
externality was now determined by a written law. Even
the prophetism that appeared after the restoration was little
more than an echo of the past, falling in with an outward
and written legalism. The literature of the people deteriorated
in quality, and prophecy became <emph>apocalypse</emph>. In such
circumstances the advent of a new man was needed to restore
the free life of religion in higher power. Christ appeared
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
in the fullness of time to do this effectually by proclaiming
the divine Fatherhood, and founding a worship <emph>in spirit and
in truth</emph>. Rising above the symbolic wrappings of the
Mosaic religion, and relying upon the native power of the
spirit itself, he showed how man may mount up to the
throne of God, adoring the Supreme without the intervention
of temple, sacrifice, or ceremony.
</p>

<p>
When the three divisions were united, the ecclesiastical
respect which had gathered round the law and the prophets
from ancient times began to be transferred to the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>c'tubim</foreign>. A
belief in their sanctity increased apace in the 1st century
before the Christian era, so that <emph>sacredness</emph> and <emph>canonicity</emph>
were almost identical. The doubts of individuals, it is true,
were still expressed respecting certain books of the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>c'tubim</foreign>,
but they had no perceptible effect upon the current opinion.
The sanctity attaching to the last division as well as the
others did not permit the total displacement of any part.
</p>

<p>
The passage in Josephus already quoted shows the state
of the canon about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 100. According to it, he considered
it to have been closed at the time of Artaxerxes Longimanus,
whom he identifies with the Ahasuerus of Esther, 464-424
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> The books were divine, so that none dared to add to,
subtract from, or alter them. To him the canon was something
belonging to the venerable past, and inviolable. In
other words, all the books were peculiarly sacred. Although
we call scarcely think this to be his private opinion merely,
it is probably expressed in exaggerated terms, and hardly
tallies with his use of the third Esdras in preference to the
canonical texts.<note place='foot'>In his <hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi>,
x. 4, 5, and xi. 1-5.</note> His authority, however, is small. Bloch's
estimate of it is too high. It is utterly improbable that
Josephus's opinion was universally held by the Jews in his
day. His division of the books is peculiar: five Mosaic,
thirteen historical, four containing religious songs and rules
of life. It appears, indeed, that as he had the same twenty-two
books we now have, Ruth was still attached to Judges,
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
and Lamentations to Jeremiah; but his credit is not on a
par with that of a Jew who adhered to his countrymen in
the time of their calamity. He wrote for the Romans. One
who believed that Esther was the youngest book in the
canon, who looked upon Ecclesiastes as Solomon's, and
Daniel as an exile production, cannot be a competent judge.
In his time the historical sense of the book of Daniel was
misapprehended; for after the Grecian dynasty had fallen
without the fulfillment of the Messianic prophecy connected
with it, the Roman empire was put into its place. Hence various allusions in
<hi rend='italic'>The History of the Jewish Wars</hi>.<note place='foot'>iv. 6,
sec. 3, and vi. 2, sec. 1.</note> The passage in the
<hi rend='italic'>Antiquities</hi>,<note place='foot'>xi. 8, sec.
5.</note> about Alexander the Great and
the priests in the Temple at Jerusalem is apocryphal. In
any case, Josephus does not furnish a genuine list of the
canonical books any more than Philo. The Pharisaic view
of his time is undoubtedly given, that the canon was then
complete and sacred. The decision proceeded from that
part of the nation who ruled both over school and people,
and regained supremacy after the destruction of the temple;
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, from the Pharisee-sect to which Josephus belonged. It
was a conclusion of orthodox Judaism. With true critical
instinct, Spinoza says that the canon was the work of the
Pharisees. The third collection was undoubtedly made
under their influence.
</p>

<p>
The origin of the <emph>threefold</emph> division of the canon is not, as
Oehler supposes,<note place='foot'>Article <q>Kanon</q> in Herzog's
<hi rend='italic'>Encyklopædie</hi>, vol. vii., p. 253; and
the same author's <hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena zur Theologie des alt.
Test.</hi>, pp. 91, 92.</note> a reflection of the different stages of religious
development through which the nation passed, as if
the foundation were the Law, the ulterior tendency in its
objective aspect the Prophets, and its subjective aspect the
Hagiographa. The books of Chronicles and others refute
this arbitrary conception. The triplicity lies in the manner
in which the books were collected. Men who belonged to
different periods and possessed different degrees of culture,
worked successively in the formation of the canon; which
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
arose out of the circumstances of the times, and the subjective
ideas of those who made it.
</p>

<p>
The places of the separate books within the first division
or <hi rend='italic'>Torah</hi>, were determined by the succession of the historical
events narrated. The second division naturally begins with
Moses's successor, Joshua. Judges, Samuel, and Kings
follow according to the regular chronology. To the former
prophets, as Joshua&mdash;Kings were called, the latter were attached,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel; succeeded by the
twelve minor prophets, arranged for the most part according
to their times, though the length of individual prophecies
and similarity of contents also influenced their position.
</p>

<p>
The arrangement of books in the third division depended
on their age, character, and authors. The Psalms were put
first, because David was supposed to be the author of many,
and on account of their intrinsic value in promoting the
religious life of the people. After the Psalms came the
three poetical works attributed to Solomon, with the book
of Job among them,&mdash;Proverbs, Job, Canticles, Ecclesiastes.
</p>

<p>
The book of Esther followed, since it was intended to
further the observance of the Purim feast; with the late
book of Daniel. The position of Daniel among the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>c'tubim</foreign>
arises solely from the fact of its posterior origin to the
prophetic writings, not excepting the book of Jonah itself;
and the attempt to account for its place in the third division
on the ground of its predominant subjectivity is based on
the unfounded assumption that the objective state of religion
is represented in the second division and the subjective
in the third. Had the book existed before 400 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, it
would doubtless have stood in the second division. But the
contents themselves demonstrate its date; contemporary
history being wrapped in a prophetic form. Having some
affinity to Esther as regards heathenism and Greek life, the
book was put next to the latter. To Ezra and Nehemiah,
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
which were adopted before the other part of the Chronicle book
and separated from it, were added the so-called Chronicles.
Such was the original succession of the third division
or <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>c'tubim</foreign>;
but it did not remain unaltered. For the use
of the synagogue, the five Megiloth were put together; so
that Ruth, which was originally appended to Judges, and
the Lamentations affixed at first to Jeremiah's prophecies,
were taken out of the second and put into the third canon.
This caused a separation of Canticles and Ecclesiastes. The
new arrangement was made for liturgical purposes.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Samaritan And Alexandrian Canons.</head>

<p>
The Samaritan canon consists of the Pentateuch alone.
This restricted collection is owing to the fact, that
when the Samaritans separated from the Jews and began
their worship on Gerizim, no more than the Mosaic writings
had been invested by Ezra with canonical dignity.
The hostile feeling between the rivals hindered the reception
of books subsequently canonized. The idea of their
having the oldest and most sacred part in its entirety satisfied
their spiritual wants. Some have thought that the
Sadducees, who already existed as a party before the Maccabean
period, agreed with the Samaritans in rejecting all
but the Pentateuch; yet this is doubtful. It is true that
the Samaritans themselves say so;<note place='foot'>See Abulfatach's
<hi rend='italic'>Annal. Samar.</hi>, p. 102, 9, &amp;c.</note> and that some of the
church fathers, Origen, Jerome, and others agree; but little
reliance can be put on the statement. The latter, perhaps,
confounded the Samaritans and Sadducces. It is also noteworthy
that Christ in refuting the Sadducees appeals to the
Pentateuch alone; yet the conclusion, that he did so because
of their admitting no more than that portion does not follow.
</p>

<p>
The Alexandrian canon differed from the Palestinian.
The Greek translation commonly called the Septuagint contains
some later productions which the Palestinian Jews did
not adopt, not only from their aversion to Greek literature
generally, but also from the recent origin of the books, perhaps
also their want of prophetic sanction. The closing
line of the third part in the Alexandrian canon was more or
less fluctuating&mdash;capable of admitting recent writings appearing
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
under the garb of old names and histories, of
embracing religious subjects; while the Palestinian collection
was pretty well determined, and all but finally settled.
The judgment of the Alexandrians was freer than that of
their brethren in the mother country. They had even
separated in a measure from the latter, by erecting a temple
at Leontopolis; and their enlargement of the canon was
another step of divergence. Nor had they the criterion of
language for the separation of canonical and uncanonical;
both classes were before them in the same tongue. The enlarged
canon was not formally sanctioned; it had not the
approval of the Sanhedrim; yet it was to the Alexandrians
what the Palestinian one was to the Palestinians. If Jews
who were not well acquainted with Hebrew, used the
apocryphal and canonical books alike, it was a matter of
feeling and custom; and if those who knew the old language
better, adhered to the canonical more closely, it was a matter
of tradition and language. The former set little value on
the prevalent consciousness of the race that the spirit of
prophecy was extinct; their view of the Spirit's operation
was larger. The latter clung to the past with all the more
tenacity that the old life of the nation had degenerated.
</p>

<p>
The Alexandrian Jews opened their minds to Greek culture
and philosophy, appropriating new ideas, and explaining
their Scriptures in accordance with wider conceptions of
the divine presence; though such adaptation turned aside
the original sense. Consciously or unconsciously they were
preparing Judaism in some degree to be the religion of
humanity. But the Rabbins shut out those enlarging influences,
confining their religion within the narrow traditions
of one people. The process by which they conserved
the old belief helped to quench its spirit, so that it became
an antique skeleton, powerless beside the new civilization
which had followed the wake of Alexander's conquests.
Rabbinical Judaism proved its incapacity for regenerating
the world; having no affinity for the philosophy of second
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
causes, or for the exercise of reason beneath the love of a
Father who sees with equal eye as God of all. Its isolation
nourished a sectarian tendency. Tradition, having no creative
power like revelation, had taken the place of it; and it
could not ward off the senility of Judaism; for its creations
are but feeble echoes of prophetic utterances, weak imitations
of poetic inspiration or of fresh wisdom. They are of
the understanding rather than the reason. The tradition
which Geiger describes as the life-giving soul of Judaism&mdash;the
daughter of revelation, enjoying the same rights with
her mother&mdash;a spiritual power that continues ever to work&mdash;an
emanation from the divine Spirit&mdash;is not, indeed, the
thing which has stiffened Judaism into Rabbinism; but
neither is it tradition proper; it is reason working upon
revelation, and moulding it into a new system. <emph>Such tradition</emph>
serves but to show the inability of genuine Judaism to
assimilate philosophic thought. <emph>Rationalizing</emph> should not
be styled the operation of tradition.
</p>

<p>
The truth of these remarks is evident from a comparison
of two books, exemplifying Alexandrian and Palestinian
Judaism respectively. The Wisdom of Solomon shows the
enlarging effect of Greek philosophy. Overpassing Jewish
particularism, it often approaches Christianity in doctrine
and spirit, so that some<note place='foot'>Kirschbaum, Weisse,
and Noack.</note> have even assumed a Christian
origin for it. The Wisdom of Jesus, son of Sirach has not
the doctrine of immortality. Death is there an eternal
sleep, and retribution takes place in this life. The Jewish
theocracy is the centre of history; Israel the elect people;
and all wisdom is embodied in the law. The writer is shut
up within the old national ideas, and leans upon the writings
in which they are expressed. Thus the Hagiographical
canon of Judea, conservative as it is, and purer in a
sense, presents a narrower type than the best specimens of
the Alexandrian one. The genial breath of Aryan culture
had not expanded its Semitism.
</p>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<p>
The identity of the Palestinian and Alexandrian canons
must be abandoned, notwithstanding the contrary arguments
of Eichhorn and Movers. It is said, indeed, that Philo
neither mentions nor quotes the Greek additions; but neither
does he quote several canonical books. According to Eichhorn,
no fewer than eight of the latter are unnoticed by
him.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Einleitung in das alte Testament</hi>,
vol. i. p. 133.</note> Besides, he had peculiar views of inspiration, and
quoted loosely from memory. Believing as he did in the
inspiration of the Greek version as a whole, it is difficult to
think that he made a distinction between the different parts
of it. In one passage he refers to the sacred books of the
Therapeutae, a fanatical sect of Jews in Egypt, as <q><emph>laws</emph>,
oracles <emph>of prophets, hymns</emph> and <emph>other books</emph> by which knowledge
and piety are increased and perfected,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De vita
contemplativa</hi>, Opp. Tom. ii., P. 475, ed. Mangey.</note> but this presents
little information as to the canon of the Egyptian Jews
generally; for it is precarious argumentation to say with
Herbst that they prove a twofold canon. Even if the Alexandrian
and Palestinian canons be identical, we cannot be
sure that <emph>the other books</emph> which the Therapeutae read as holy
besides the law, <emph>the prophets and hymns</emph>, differed from the
hagiographa, and so constituted another canon than the
general Egyptian one. It is quite possible that the <emph>hymns</emph>
mean the Psalms; and <emph>the other books</emph>, the rest of the hagiographa.
The argument for the identity of the two canons
deduced from 4 Esdras xiv. 44, &amp;c., as if the twenty-four
open books were distinguished from the other writings dictated
to Ezra, is of no force, because verisimilitude required
that an Egyptian Jew himself must make Ezra conform to
the old Palestinian canon. It is also alleged that the grandson
of Jesus Sirach, who translated his grandfather's work
during his abode in Egypt, knew no difference between the
Hebrew and Greek canon, though he speaks of the Greek
version; but he speaks as a Palestinian, without having
occasion to allude to the difference between the canonical
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
books of the Palestinian and Egyptian Jews. The latter
may have reckoned the apocryphal writings in the third
division; and therefore the translator of Jesus Sirach could
recognize them in the ordinary classification. The mention
of <emph>three</emph> classes is not opposed to their presence in the third.
The general use of an enlarged canon in Egypt cannot be
denied, though it was somewhat loose, not regarded as a
completed collection, and without express rabbinical sanction.
If they did not <emph>formally</emph> recognize a canon of their
own, as De Wette says of them, they had and used one
larger than the Palestinian, without troubling themselves
about a <emph>formal</emph> sanction for it by a body of Rabbis at Jerusalem
or elsewhere. Their canon was not identical with
that of the Palestinians, and all the argumentation founded
upon Philo's non-quotation of the apocryphal books, fails to
prove the contrary. The very way in which apocryphal are
inserted among canonical books in the Alexandrian canon,
shows the equal rank assigned to both. Esdras first and
second succeed the Chronicles; Tobit and Judith are between
Nehemiah and Esther; the Wisdom of Solomon and
Sirach follow Canticles; Baruch succeeds Jeremiah; Daniel
is followed by Susanna and other productions of the same
class; and the whole closes with the three books of Maccabees.
Such is the order in the Vatican MS.
</p>

<p>
The threefold division of the canon, indicating three
stages in its formation, has continued. Josephus, indeed,
gives another, based on the nature of the separate books,
not on MSS. We learn nothing from him of its history,
which is somewhat remarkable, considering that he did not
live two centuries after the last work had been added. The
account of the canon's final arrangement was evidently
unknown to him.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. Number And Order Of The Separate Books.</head>

<p>
The number of the books was variously estimated.
Josephus gives twenty-two, which was the usual number
among Christian writers in the second, third, and fourth
centuries, having been derived perhaps from the letters of
the Hebrew alphabet. Origen, Jerome, and others have it.
It continued longest among the teachers of the Greek
Church, and is even in Nicephorus's stichometry.<note place='foot'>See Credner's
<hi rend='italic'>Zur Geschichte des Kanons</hi>, p. 124.</note> The
enumeration in question has Ruth with Judges, and Lamentations
with Jeremiah. In Epiphanius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De mens. et
pond.</hi>, chapters 22, 23, vol. ii. p. 180, ed. Petav.</note> the number twenty-seven
is found, made by taking the alphabet enlarged with
the five final letters, and dividing Samuel, Kings, and
Chronicles into two books each. This is probably an ingenious
combination belonging to the father himself. The
Talmud has twenty-four,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Baba Bathra</hi>,
fol. 14, 2.</note> a number which did not originate
in the Greek alphabet, else the Palestinian Jews would not
have adopted it. The synagogue did not fix it officially.
After the Pentateuch and the former prophets, which are in
the usual order, it gives Jeremiah as the first of the later,
succeeded by Ezekiel and Isaiah with the twelve minor
prophets. The Talmud knows no other reason for such an
order than that it was made according to the contents of
the prophetic books, not according to the times of the
writers. This solution is unsatisfactory. It is more probable
that chronology had to do with the arrangement.<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Fürst, Der Kanon u. s. w. p.</hi> 14, &amp;c.</note>
After the anonymous collection or second part of Isaiah
had been joined to the first or authentic prophecies, the
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
lateness of these oracles brought Isaiah into the third place
among the greater prophets. The Talmudic order of the
Hagiographa is Ruth, Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
Canticles, Lamentations, Daniel, Esther, Ezra, Chronicles.
Here Ruth precedes the Psalter, coming as near the former
prophets as possible; for it properly belongs to them, the
contents associating it with the Judges' time. The Talmudic
order is that usually adopted in German MSS. What
is the true estimate of it? Is it a proper Talmudic regulation?
Perhaps not, else the Hebrew MSS. of the French
and Spanish Jews would not so readily have departed from
it. Bloch supposes that Baba Bathra, which gives the
arrangement of the books, is one of the apocryphal Boraithas
that proceeded from an individual teacher and had no binding
authority.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Studien zur Geschichte der
alttestamentliche Literatur, u. s. w.</hi>,
p. 18, etc.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Masoretic arrangement differs from the Talmudic in
putting Isaiah before Jeremiah and Ezekiel. The Hagiographa
are, Psalms, Proverbs, Job, Canticles, Ruth, Lamentations,
Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel, Ezra (with Nehemiah),
Chronicles.<note place='foot'>Hody <hi rend='italic'>De Bibliorum textibus
originalibus</hi>, p. 644.</note> This is usually adopted in Spanish MSS. But
MSS. often differ arbitrarily, because transcribers did not
consider themselves bound to any one arrangement.<note place='foot'>Hody gives
lists of the order in which the books stand in some
early printed editions and in a few MSS., p. 645.</note> According
to some, a very old testimony to the commencing
and concluding books of the third division is given by the
New Testament (Luke xxiv. 44; Matthew xxiii. 35), agreeably
to which the Psalms were first and the Chronicles last;
but this is inconclusive.
</p>

<p>
The Alexandrian translators, as we have seen already,
placed the books differently from the Palestinian Jews. In
their version Daniel comes after Ezekiel, so that it is put
beside the greater prophets. Was this done by Jews or
Christians? Perhaps by the latter, who put it between the
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
greater and lesser prophets, or in other words, out of the
third into the second division, because of dogmatic grounds,
and so effaced a trace of the correct chronology. Little importance,
however, can be attached to the order of the
books in the Septuagint; because the work was done at
different times by different persons. But whatever may
have been the arrangement of the parts when the whole
was complete, we know that it was disturbed by Protestants
separating the apocryphal writings and putting them
all together.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. Use Of The Old Testament By The First Christian
Writers, And By The Fathers Till The Time Of
Origen.</head>

<p>
The writings of the New Testament show the authors'
acquaintance with the apocryphal books. They have
expressions and ideas derived from them. Stier collected
one hundred and two passages which bear some resemblance
to others in the Apocrypha;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Apokryphen,
u. s. w.</hi>, p. 14, &amp;c.</note> but they needed sifting, and
were cut down to a much smaller number by Bleek. They
are James i. 19, from Sirach v. 11 and iv. 29; 1 Peter i. 6, 7,
from Wisdom iii. 3-7; Hebrews xi. 34, 35, from 2 Maccabees
vi. 18-vii. 42; Hebrews i. 3, from Wisdom vii. 26, &amp;c.;
Romans i. 20-32, from Wisdom xiii.-xv.; Romans ix. 21,
from Wisdom xv. 7; Eph. vi. 13-17, from Wisdom v. 18-20; 1 Cor. ii. 10, &amp;c., from
Judith viii. 14. Others are less probable.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Studien
und Kritiken</hi> for 1853, p. 267, &amp;c.</note>
When Bishop Cosin says, that <q>in all the New
Testament we find not any one passage of the apocryphal
books to have been alleged either by Christ or His apostles
for the confirmation of their doctrine,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A
Scholastical History of the Canon</hi>, p. 22.</note> the argument,
though based on fact, is scarcely conclusive; else Esther,
Canticles, Ecclesiastes, and other works might be equally
discredited. Yet it is probable that the New Testament
writers, though quoting the Septuagint much more than the
original, were disinclined to the additional parts of the
Alexandrian canon. They were Palestinian themselves, or
had in view Judaisers of a narrow creed. Prudential
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
motives, no less than a predisposition in favor of the old
national canon, may have hindered them from expressly citing
any apocryphal production. The apostle Paul and
probably the other writers of the New Testament, believed
in the literal inspiration of the Biblical books, for he uses
an argument in the Galatian epistle which turns upon the
singular or plural of a noun.<note place='foot'>See Rothe, <hi rend='italic'>Zur
Dogmatik, Studien u. Kritiken</hi> for 1860, p. 67, &amp;c.
The apostle's argument rests on the occurrence of the singular
(<emph>seed</emph>, σπέρμα) in Genesis xvii. 8 (LXX.), not the plural
(<emph>seeds</emph>, σπέρματα);
though the plural of the corresponding Hebrew word could not have
been used, because it has a different signification. Grammatical inaccuracy
is made the basis of a certain theological interpretation. Those
who wish to see a specimen of labored ingenuity unsuccessfully applied
to the justification of St. Paul's argument in this passage, may
consult Tholuck's <hi rend='italic'>Das alte Testament
in neuem Testament</hi>, p. 63, etc.
Vierte Auflage. (Epist. to the Galatians iii. 16.)</note> And as the inspiration of
the Septuagint translation was commonly held by the Christians
of the early centuries, it may be that the apostles and
evangelists made no distinction between its parts. Jude
quotes Enoch, an apocryphal work not in the Alexandrian
canon; so that he at least had no rigid notions about the
difference of canonical and uncanonical writings. Still we
know that the compass of the Old Testament canon was
somewhat unsettled to the Christians of the first century, as
it was to the Hellenist Jews themselves. It is true that the
Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms were universally recognized
as authoritative; but the extent of the third division
was indefinite, so that the non-citation of the three books
respecting which there was a difference of opinion among
the Jews may not have been accidental. Inasmuch, however,
as the Greek-speaking Jews received more books than
their Palestinian brethren, the apostles and their immediate
successors were not wholly disinclined to the use of the apocryphal
productions. The undefined boundary of the canon
facilitated also the recognition of all primitive records of
the new Revelation.
</p>

<p>
The early fathers, who wrote in Greek, used the Greek
Bible, as almost all of them were ignorant of Hebrew. Thus
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
restricted; they naturally considered its parts alike, citing
apocryphal and canonical in the same way. Accordingly,
Irenæus<note place='foot'>Died 202 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
quotes Baruch under the name of <q>Jeremiah the
prophet;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Advers. Hares.</hi>, v. 35,
referring to Baruch iv. 36, and v. p. 335, ed.
Massuet.</note> and the additions to Daniel as <q>Daniel the
prophet.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, iv., 26, referring
to Daniel xiii. 20 in the Septuagint.</note> Clement of Alexandria<note place='foot'>Died
220<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> uses the apocryphal
books like the canonical ones, for explanation and proof indiscriminately.
He is fond of referring to Baruch, which
he cites upwards of twenty-four times in the second book of
his <hi rend='italic'>Pædagogus</hi>, and in a manner to show that he esteemed
it as highly as many other parts of the Old Testament. A passage from Baruch
is introduced by the phrase,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Pædagog.</hi>
vi. 3.</note> <q>the divine Scripture says;</q> and
another from Tobit by<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Stromata</hi>,
ii. 23.</note> <q>Scripture
has briefly signified this, saying.</q> Assuming that
Wisdom was written by Solomon, he uses it as canonical and inspired,
designating it <emph>divine</emph>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Stromata</hi>,
iv. 16.</note> Judith he cites with other books of the Old
Testament<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, ii. 7.</note>; and the Song
of the three children in the furnace is used as
Scripture.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ex Script. prophet. eclogae</hi>,
c. 1.</note> Ecclesiasticus also is so
treated.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Stromateis</hi>, ii. 15.</note>
Dionysius of Alexandria<note place='foot'>Died 264
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> cites
Ecclesiasticus (xvi. 26), introducing the passage with <q>hear
divine oracles.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Natura; Routh's
Reliquiae Sacrae</hi>, vol. iv. p. 356.</note> The same book is elsewhere cited, chapters
xliii. 29, 30<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Fragment. Nicet.</hi>, in
<hi rend='italic'>Reliq. Sacrae</hi>, vol. ii. p. 404.</note>
and i. 8. 9.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, p. 407.</note>
So is Wisdom, vii. 15<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, p. 406.</note>
and 25.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epistola ad. Dionys. Roman</hi>, in
<hi rend='italic'>Reliq. Sacr.</hi>, vol. iii. p. 195.</note>
Baruch (iii. 12-15) is also quoted.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Reliq.
Sacr.</hi>, vol. ii. p. 408.</note> The fathers
who wrote in Latin used some of the old Latin versions of
which Augustine speaks; one of them, and that the oldest
probably dating soon after the middle of the second century,
being known to us as the <hi rend='italic'>Itala</hi>. As this was made from the
Septuagint, it had the usual apocryphal books. Jerome's
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
critical revision or new version did not supplant the old
Latin till some time after his death. Tertullian<note place='foot'>Died 220
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> quotes the
Wisdom of Solomon expressly as Solomon's;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Advers.
Valentinianos.</hi> ch. 2.</note> and introduces Sirach by <q>as it is
written.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Exhortatione Castitatis</hi>, ch.
2.</note> He cites Baruch as Jeremiah.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra
Gnosticos</hi>, ch. 8.</note>
He also believes in the authenticity of the book of Enoch, and defends it as
<emph>Scripture</emph> at some length.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Habitu
Muliebri</hi>, ch. 3.</note> Cyprian often
cites the Greek additions to the Palestinian canon. He introduces Tobit
with the words <q>as it is written,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi>
55, p. 110, ed. Fell.</note> or
<q>divine Scripture teaches, saying;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Orat.
Domin.</hi> p. 153.</note> and Wisdom with,
<q>the Holy Spirit shows by Solomon.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Exhortat.
Martyrii</hi>, ch. 12, p. 182.</note> Ecclesiasticus is
introduced with, <q>it is written;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Mortal</hi>, p. 161.</note> and Baruch with, <q>the
Holy Spirit teaches by Jeremiah.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Orat.
Domin.</hi>, p. 141.</note> 1 and 2 Maccabees are
used as Scripture;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Testim.</hi> iii. 4, p.
62.</note> as are the additions to Daniel.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Lapsis</hi>, p. 133, &amp;c.</note> The
African fathers follow the Alexandrian canon without scruple.
Hippolytus of Rome (about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 220), who wrote in
Greek, quotes Baruch as Scripture;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adv.
Noel.</hi> v.</note> and interprets the additions
to Daniel, such as Susanna, as Scripture likewise.<note place='foot'>See Migne's
edition, p. 689, &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<p>
Melito of Sardis<note place='foot'>Died after 171.</note>
made it his special business to inquire
among the Palestinian Jews about the number and names
of their canonical books; and the result was the following
list:&mdash;the five books of Moses, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, four
books of Kings, two of Chronicles, the Psalms of David, the
Proverbs of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Songs, Job,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, the twelve in one book, Daniel, Ezekiel,
Ezra.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ap.</hi> Euseb.
H. E., lib. iv. ch. 26.</note> Here Ezra includes Nehemiah; and Esther is absent,
because the Jews whom he consulted did not consider
it canonical.
</p>

<p>
Origen's<note place='foot'>Died 254, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
list does not differ much from the Palestinian
one. After the Pentateuch, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Kings
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
first and second, Samuel, Chronicles, come Ezra first and
second, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Isaiah,
Jeremiah with Lamentations and the epistle, Daniel, Ezekiel,
Job, Esther. Besides these there are the Maccabees, which are inscribed
<hi rend='italic'>Sarbeth Sarbane el</hi>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ap.</hi>
Euseb. H. E., lib. iv. ch. 25.</note> The twelve prophets
are omitted in the Greek; but the mistake is rectified in
Rufinus's Latin version, where they follow Canticles, as in
Hilary and Cyril of Jerusalem. It is remarkable that Baruch
is given, and why? Because Origen took it from the
MSS. of the Septuagint he had before him, in which the
epistle is attributed to Jeremiah. But the catalogue had no
influence upon his practice. He followed the prevailing
view of the extended canon. Sirach is introduced by <q>for
this also <emph>is written</emph></q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in
Joann.</hi> tom. xxxii. ch. 14, ed. Huet. p, 409.</note>
the book of Wisdom is cited as a <emph>divine
word</emph>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra Cels.</hi> iii. 72;
vol. i. p. 494, ed. Delarue.</note> the writer is called a
<emph>prophet</emph>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Exodus</hi>, Hom. vi. i;
Levit. Hom. v. 2.</note> <emph>Christ</emph> is represented
as speaking in it <emph>through Solomon</emph>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In
Levit.</hi>, Hom. xii. 4.</note> and Wisdom vii. 17 is adduced
as <emph>the word of Christ himself</emph>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In
Lukam</hi>, Hom. 21.</note> Tobit is cited
as <emph>Scripture</emph>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Oratione</hi>, ii.
p. 215.</note> His view of the additions to the books of
Daniel and Esther, as well as his opinion about Tobit, are
sufficiently expressed in the epistle to Africanus, so that
scattered quotations from these parts of Scripture can be
properly estimated. Of the history of Susanna he ventures to say that the
Jews withdrew it on purpose from the people.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Opp.
ed</hi> Delarue, vol. i. p. 12.</note>
He seems to argue in favor of books used and read in
the churches, though they may be put out of the canon by
the Jews. As divine Providence had preserved the sacred
Scriptures, no alteration should be made in the ecclesiastical
tradition respecting books sanctioned by the churches
though they be external to the Hebrew canon.
</p>

<p>
Most of the writings of Methodius, Bishop of Tyre<note place='foot'>Died 311.</note> are
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
lost, so that we know little of his opinions respecting the
books of Scripture. But it is certain that he employed the
Apocrypha like the other writings of the Old Testament.
Thus Sirach (xviii. 30 and xix. 2) is quoted in the same
way as the Proverbs.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Convivium decem virginum</hi>,
in Combefis's Auctarium bibliothecae Graecorum patrum, p.
69.</note> Wisdom (iv. 1-3) is cited,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
p. 69.</note> and Baruch (iii. 14).<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
p. 109.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. The New Testament Canon In The First
Three Centuries.</head>

<p>
The first Christians relied on the Old Testament as their
chief religious book. To them it was of divine origin
and authority. The New Testament writings came into
gradual use, by the side of the older Jewish documents, according
to the times in which they appeared and the names
of their reputed authors. The Epistles of Paul were the
earliest written; after which came the Apocalypse, the
Epistle to the Hebrews, and other documents, all in the first
century. After the first gospel had undergone a process of
translation, re-writing, and interpolation, from the Aramaic
basis, <emph>the discourses</emph>,<note place='foot'>τὰ λόγια.
<hi rend='italic'>Ap.</hi> Euseb. H. E. iii. 39.</note>
of which Papias of Hierapolis speaks,
until the traces of another original than the Greek were all
but effaced; it appeared in its present form early in the
second century. Soon after, that of Luke was composed,
whose prevailing Pauline tendency was not allowed to suppress
various features of a Jewish Essene type. The second
gospel, which bears evidences of its derivation from the
other synoptists, was followed by the fourth. The last
document was the so-called second Epistle of Peter. It is
manifest that tradition assumed various forms after the
death of Jesus; that legend and myth speedily surrounded
His sacred person; that the unknown writers were influenced
by the peculiar circumstances in which they stood
with respect to Jewish and Gentile Christianity; and that
their uncritical age dealt considerably in the marvelous.
That the life of the great Founder should be overlaid with
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
extraneous materials, is special matter for regret. However
conscientious and truth-loving they may have been, the reporters
were unequal to their work. It is also remarkable
that so many of them should be unknown; productions being
attached to names of repute to give them greater
currency.
</p>

<p>
When Marcion came from Pontus to Rome (144 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>,)
he brought with him a Scripture-collection consisting of
ten Pauline epistles. With true critical instinct he did not
include those addressed to Timothy and Titus, as also the
epistle to the Hebrews. The gospel of Marcion was Luke's
in an altered state. From this and other facts we conclude
that external parties were the first who carried out the idea
of collecting Christian writings, and of putting them either
beside or over against the sacred books of the Old Testament,
in support of their systems. As to Basilides (125
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), his supposed quotations from the New Testament in
Hippolytus are too precarious to be trusted.<note place='foot'>Davidson's
<hi rend='italic'>Introduction to the Study of the N. Testam.</hi> vol. x.
p. 388.</note> Testimonies
to the <q>acknowledged</q> books of the New Testament as
Scripture have been transferred from his followers to himself;
so that his early witness to the canon breaks down.
It is inferred from statements in Origen and Jerome that he
had a gospel of his own somewhat like St. Luke's, but extra-canonical.
His son Isidore and succeeding disciples used
Matthew's gospel. Jerome says that Marcion and Basilides
denied the Pauline authorship of the epistle to the Hebrews
and the pastoral ones.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Explanatio in Epist.
ad Titum</hi>, vol. iv. p. 407, ed. Benedict.</note> It is also doubtful whether
Valentinus's (140-166 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) alleged citations from the New
Testament can be relied upon. The passages of this kind ascribed
to him by the fathers belong in a great measure to his
disciples. The fragment of a letter preserved by Clement
of Alexandria in the second book of the Stromata, has been
thought to contain references to the gospels of Matthew and
Luke; but the fact is doubtful. Nor has Henrici proved
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
that Valentinus used John's gospel.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die
Valentinianische Gnosis und die heilige Schrift</hi>, p. 75.</note> But his followers,
including Ptolemy (180 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) and Heracleon
(185-200 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), quote the Gospels and
other portions of the New Testament.<note place='foot'>A good
deal of manipulation has been needlessly employed for the
purpose of placing these heretics as early as possible; but nothing
definite can be extracted from Irenæus's notices of them. Hippolytus's
use of the present tense, in speaking of them, renders it probable
that they were nearly his contemporaries.</note>
From Hippolytus's account of the Ophites, Peratæ,
and Sethians, we infer that the Christian writings were
much employed by them. They rarely cite an apocryphal
work. More than one hundred and sixty citations from the
New Testament have been gathered out of their writings.<note place='foot'>See
the Indexes to Duncker and Schneidewin's edition.</note>
We may admit that these Ophites and Peratæ were of early
origin, the former being the oldest known of the Gnostic
parties; but there is no proof that the acquaintance with
the New Testament which Hippolytus attributes to them
belongs to the first rather than the second half of the second
century. The early existence of the sect does not show an
early citation of the Christian books by it, especially of
John's gospel; unless its primary were its last stage. Later
and earlier Ophites are not distinguished in the <hi rend='italic'>Philosophumena</hi>.
Hence there is a presumption that the author had the
former in view, which is favored by no mention of them occurring
in the <q>Adversus omnes Hæreses</q> usually appended
to Tertullian's <hi rend='italic'>Præscriptiones Hæreticorum</hi>, and by Irenæus's
derivation of their heresy from that of Valentinus. The
latter father does not even speak of the Peratæ. Clement
of Alexandria is the first who alludes to them. The early
heretics were desirous of confirming their peculiar opinions
by the writings current among Catholic Christians, so that
the formation of a canon by them began soon after the commencement
of the second century, and continued till the
end of it; contemporaneously with the development of a
Catholic Church and its necessary adjunct a Catholic canon.
</p>

<p>
No New Testament canon, except a partial and unauthoritative
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
one, existed till the latter half of the second century,
that is, till the idea of a Catholic church began to be entertained.
The living power of Christianity in its early
stages had no need of books for its nurture. But in the
development of a church organization the internal rule of
consciousness was changed into an external one of faith.
The Ebionites or Jewish Christians had their favorite Gospels
and Acts. The gospel of Matthew was highly prized
by them, existing as it did in various recensions, of which
the gospel according to the Hebrews was one. Other documents,
such as the Revelation of John; and the preaching
of Peter, a Jewish-Christian history subsequently re-written
and employed in the Clementine Recognitions and Homilies,
were also in esteem. Even so late as 175-180 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, Hegesippus,
a Jewish Christian, does not seem to have had a
canon consisting of the four gospels and Paul's Epistles, but
appeals to <q>the law and the prophets and <emph>the Lord</emph>,</q> so
that his leading principle was, the identity of Jesus's words
with the Old Testament; agreeably to the tenets of the
party he belonged to. The source whence he drew the words
of Jesus was probably the Gospel according to the Hebrews,
a document which we know he used, on the authority of
Eusebius. He does not refer to Paul except by implication in a passage given in
Photius from Stephen Gobar,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, cod.
232.</note> where
he says that such as used the words <q>Eye hath not seen,
nor ear heard,</q> &amp;c., falsified the Divine Scriptures and the
Lord's words, <q>Blessed are your eyes for they see,</q> &amp;c.
As Paul quoted the condemned language, he is blamed.<note place='foot'>It is
an unfounded assumption that Paul cited the passage by
<q>mere accident;</q> on the contrary, he gives it as canonical, with <q>as
it is written</q> (1 Corinth. ii. 9). It may be that the Gnostics are referred
to as using the objectionable passage; but it is special pleading
<emph>to limit</emph> it to them, when Paul has expressly used the same, deriving
it either from Isaiah lxiv. 4, or some unknown document; just as it is
special pleading to identify ὁ κύριος standing beside
νόμος καὶ προφῆται, with <emph>the New Testament</emph>.
The word excludes Paul's Epistles from
the canon; nor is there any evidence to the contrary, as has been
alleged, in the two Syriac epistles attributed to Clement, which Wetstein
published. Comp. <hi rend='italic'>Eusebius's H. E.</hi> iv. 22,
<hi rend='italic'>Photius's Bibliotheca</hi>, 232. Apologists have labored to prove
Hegesippus an orthodox Catholic Christian, like Irenæus; but in vain. He was a Jewish
Christian of moderate type, holding intercourse with Pauline Christians
at the time when the Catholic Church was being formed.</note>
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
Though he knew Paul's epistles, he does not look upon
them as <emph>authoritative</emph>. He betrays no acquaintance with the
fourth gospel; for the question, <q>What is the door to
Jesus?</q> does not presuppose the knowledge of John x. 2,
7, 9. Nösgen has failed to prove Hegesippus's Jewish descent;
and Holtzmann's mediating view of him is incorrect.<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Hilgenfeld's Zeitschrift</hi> for 1875-1878.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Clementine Homilies (161-180 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) used the four
canonical gospels even the fourth (which is somewhat
singular in a writer who denies the deity of Christ), and assigned
it to the apostle John. The gospel according to the
Egyptians was also employed. Paul's epistles were rejected
of course, as well as the Acts; since the apostle of the Gentiles
was pointed at in Simon Magus, whom Peter refutes.
It is, therefore, obvious that a collection of the New Testament
writings could make little progress among the Ebionites
of the second century. Their reverence for the law
and the prophets hindered another canon. Among the
Gentile Christians the formation of a canon took place more
rapidly, though Judaic influences retarded it even there.
After Paul's epistles were interchanged between churches,
a few of them would soon be put together. A collection of
this kind is implied in 2 Peter iii. 16. The pastoral epistles,
which show their dependence on the authentic Pauline ones,
with those of Peter, presuppose a similar collection; which
along with the Synoptists, existed before the fourth gospel.
The Apocalypse and the epistle to the Hebrews were obnoxious
to the Pauline churches, as Paul's letters were to the
Jewish-Christian ones. Hence the former were outside the
Pauline collections.
</p>

<p>
The apostolic fathers quote from the Old Testament,
which was sacred and inspired to them. They have scarcely
any express citations from the New Testament. <emph>Allusions</emph>
occur, especially to the epistles.
</p>

<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>

<p>
The first Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians (about
120 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), implies acquaintance with several of the epistles,
with those to the Corinthians, Romans, Hebrews, and perhaps
others. Two passages have also been adduced as
derived from the gospels of Matthew and Luke, viz., in
chapters xiii. 2 and xlvi. 8; but probably some other source
supplied them, such as oral tradition. It has also been
argued that the quotation in the fifteenth chapter, <q>The
Scripture says somewhere, This people honoreth me with
their lips, but their heart is far from me,</q> comes from Mark
vii. 6 in which it varies from the Hebrew of Isaiah xxix.
13, as well as the Septuagint version. Clement therefore, so
it is said, quotes the Old Testament through the medium of
the gospels (Matthew xv. 8, Mark vii. 6). But the argument
is inconclusive because the words agree closely enough
with the Septuagint to render the supposition very probable
that they are a memorized citation from it. As they stand,
they coincide exactly neither with Mark nor the Septuagint.<note place='foot'>There
is ἄπεστιν instead of the Septuagint's and Mark's (Tischend.) ἀπέχει.</note>
Thus we dissent from the opinion of Gebhardt and Harnack.
Wherever <q>Scripture</q> is cited, or the expression <q>it is
written</q> occurs, the Old Testament is meant.
</p>

<p>
Hermas (about 140 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) seems to have used the epistle
to the Ephesians and perhaps that to the Hebrews, as well
as the epistle of James; but there is great uncertainty about
the matter, for there is no <emph>express</emph> or certain quotation from
any part of the New Testament. The writer often alludes
to words of Jesus, found in Matthew's gospel, so that he may
have been acquainted with it. Keim<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
Jesu von Nazara</hi>, vol. 1, p. 144.</note> and others have discovered
references to the fourth gospel; but they are invalid.
There is no allusion to the Acts in vis. iv. 2, 4. The only
<emph>Scripture</emph> cited is the apocryphal book
<hi rend='italic'>Eldat and Modat</hi>, now
lost.<note place='foot'>See Vision ii, 3, 4, with the
prolegomena of De Gebhardt: and Harnack,
p. lxxiii.</note> The writer seems to have known several Jewish
Apocalypses.<note place='foot'>See Holtzmann in Hilgenfeld's
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift</hi> for 1875, p. 40, &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>

<p>
Barnabas (about 119 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) has but one quotation from the
New Testament, if, indeed, it be such. Apparently, Matthew
xx. 16 or xxii. 14 is introduced by <q>as it is written,</q> showing
that the gospel was considered <emph>Scripture</emph>.<note place='foot'>Epist.
ch. iv.</note> This is the
earliest trace of canonical authority being transferred from
the Old Testament to Christian writings. But the citation
is not certain. The original may be 4 Esdras, viii. 3; and
even if the writer took the words from Matthew's gospel, it
is possible that he used <q>it is written</q> with reference to
their prototype in the Old Testament. Of such interchanges,
examples occur in writers of the second century; and it is
the more probable that this is one, from the fact that 4
Esdras is elsewhere considered a prophet and referred to in
the same way as Ezekiel.<note place='foot'>Chapter xii. pp.
30, 31, ed. 2, Hilgenfeld.</note> Barnabas's citation of a gospel
as canonical is wholly improbable, since even Justin, thirty
years after, never quotes the New Testament writings as
<emph>Scripture</emph>. The thing would be anomalous and opposed to
the history of the first half of the second century. When
these post-apostolic productions appeared, the New Testament
writings did not stand on the same level with the Old,
and were not yet esteemed <emph>sacred</emph> and <emph>inspired</emph> like the Jewish
Scriptures. The Holy Spirit was thought to dwell in
all Christians, without being confined to a few writers; and
his influence was the common heritage of believers. There
are evidences of Barnabas's acquaintance with the Epistles
to the Romans and Corinthians; nor is it improbable that
he knew the canonical gospel of Matthew, though one passage
<emph>appears</emph> to contradict Matthew xxviii. 10, &amp;c., without
necessarily implying ignorance of what lies in it, viz., that
the ascension of Jesus took place on the day of his resurrection.<note place='foot'>See
Chapter xv. end, with Hilgenfeld's note, <hi rend='italic'>Barnabae epistula ed.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>altera</hi>, pp. 118, 119.</note>
Strangely enough, Keim thinks that the writer had
John's gospel before him; but this opinion is refuted by the
end of Barnabas's fifth chapter.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epis.</hi>
p. 13 ed. Hilgenfeld.</note> Holtzmann has ably disposed
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
of the considerations adduced by Keim.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für wissenschaftliche Theologie</hi>, 1871, P. 336, etc.</note> Barnabas
quotes the book of Enoch as <emph>Scripture</emph>;<note place='foot'>Chapters
xvi. and iv. In the former the reference is to Enoch
lxxxix. 56, 66, 67, but the latter is not in the present book of Enoch,
though Hilgenfeld thinks he has discovered it in lxxxix. 61-64 and xc.
17. (<hi rend='italic'>Dillmann's Das Buch Henoch</hi>, pp. 61, 63). Was another
apocryphal Jewish book current in the time of Barnabas, under the name of
Enoch; or did he confound one document with another, misled by
the Greek translation of an apocalyptic work which had fallen into
discredit? See Hilgenfeld's <hi rend='italic'>Barnabae Epistula</hi>,
ed. 2 pp. 77, 78.
</note> and an apocryphal
prophecy is introduced with, <q>another prophet says.</q><note place='foot'>Chapter
xi.</note>
</p>

<p>
As far as we can judge from Eusebius's account of
Papias<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccles.</hi>
iii. 39.</note> (about 150 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), that writer knew nothing of a
New Testament canon. He speaks of Matthew and Mark;
but it is most probable that he had documents which either
formed the basis of our present Matthew and Mark, or were
taken into them and written over.<note place='foot'>A small
body of literature originating in the fragment of Papias
preserved by Eusebius (Hist. Eccles. iii, 39, 1-4) has appeared;
though it is difficult to obtain satisfactory conclusions. Not only have
Weiffenbach and Leimbach written treatises on the subject, but other
scholars have entered into it more or less fully,&mdash;Zahn, Steitz, Riggenbach,
Hilgenfeld, Lipsius, Keim, Martens, Loman, Holtzmann, Hausrath,
Tietz, and Lightfoot. The fragment is not of great weight in
settling the authenticity of the four gospels. Indirectly indeed it
throws some light on the connection of two evangelists with written
memoirs of the life of Jesus; but it rather suggests than solves various
matters of importance. It is tolerably clear that the gospels, if such
they may be called, of which he speaks as written by Matthew and
Mark, were not identical with the works now existing under the names
of these evangelists; and that no safe conclusion can be drawn from
Papias's silence about John's and Luke's as not then in existence.
Neither the present gospels nor any other had been converted into
<emph>Scripture</emph>; since he regarded oral traditions as more credible than
written memoirs. Those who hold that the presbyter John was none
other than the apostle, Eusebius having misunderstood the fragment
and made a different John from the apostle, as well as the critics who
deduce from the fragment the fact that John suffered martyrdom in
Palestine, have not established these conclusions. Papias refers to
the material he got for explaining the λογία, rather than the source
whence they were drawn. But whether he learnt directly from the
elders, or indirectly as the preposition (παρὰ) would seem to indicate,
and whether the sentence beginning with <q>What Andrew,</q> &amp;c., (τί
Ἀνδρέας κ. τ. λ.) stands in apposition to the <q>words of the elders,</q>
(τούς τῶν πρεσβυτέρων λόγους) or not, are things uncertain.</note> According to Andreas
of Cæsarea he was acquainted with the Apocalypse of John;
while Eusebius testifies to his knowledge of 1 Peter and 1
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
John. But he had no conception of canonical authority attaching
to any part of the New Testament. His language
implies the opposite, in that he prefers unwritten tradition
to the gospel he speaks of. He neither felt the want nor
knew the existence of <emph>inspired</emph> gospels.
</p>

<p>
We need not notice the three short Syriac epistles attributed
to Ignatius, as we do not believe them to be his, but of
later origin. Traces of later ideas about the canonicity of
the New Testament appear in the shorter Greek recension
of the Ignatian epistles (about 175 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>)
There <emph>the Gospel</emph> and <emph>the Apostles</emph>
are recognized as the constituents of the
book.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epist. ad Philadelph.</hi>,
ch. 5 See Hefele's note on the passage.
The other well-known passage in chapter viii. is too uncertain in reading
and meaning to be adduced here.</note> The writer also used the Gospel according to the
Hebrews, for there is a quotation from it in the epistle to
the Smyrnians.<note place='foot'>Chapter iii.</note>
The second part of the collection seems to
have wanted the epistle to the Ephesians.<note place='foot'>To the Ephesians,
chapter xii.</note> The two leading
parties, long antagonistic, had now become united; the apostles Peter and
Paul being mentioned together.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epist.
ad Romanos</hi>, iv.</note> In the
Testaments of the twelve patriarchs (about 170 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>),
Paul's life is said to be described in <q>holy books,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, his
own epistles and the Acts.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Testam. Benj.</hi>
11, p. 201, ed. Sinker.</note>
</p>

<p>
Justin Martyr (150 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) knew the first and third of the
synoptic gospels. His use of Mark's does not appear. His
knowledge of the fourth is denied by many, and zealously
defended by others. Thoma finds proofs that Justin knew
it well, and used it freely as a text-book of gnosis, without
recognizing it as the historical work of an apostle; an
hypothesis encumbered with difficulties.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für wissenschaftliche Theologie</hi>, 1875, p. 490,
<hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></note> Whatever be said
about Justin's acquaintance with this gospel; its existence
before 140 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> is incapable either of decisive or probable
proof; and this father's Logos-doctrine is less developed
than the Johannine, because it is encumbered with the notion
of miraculous birth by a virgin. The Johannine
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
authorship has receded before the tide of modern criticism;
and though this tide is arbitrary at times, it is here irresistible.
Apologists should abstain from strong assertions on
a point so difficult, as that each <q>gospel is distinctly recognized
by him;</q> for the noted passage in the dialogue with
Trypho does not support them.<note place='foot'>Ἐν τόις
ἀπομνημονέυμασαι, ἄ φημι ὑπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων αὐτοῦ καὶ τῶν ἐκείνοις
παρακολουθησάντων συντετάχθαι. Sec. 103. Here <q>the apostles</q> are not
necessarily Matthew and John. Apocryphal gospels then current bore
the name of apostles or their attendants,&mdash;of Peter, James, Nicodemus,
Matthias, &amp;c.</note> It is pretty certain that
he employed an extra-canonical gospel, the so-called gospel
of the Hebrews. This Petrine document may be referred
to in a passage which is unfortunately capable of a double
interpretation.<note place='foot'>Καὶ τὸ εἰπεῖν
μετωνομακέναι αὐτὸν Πέτρον καὶ γεγράφθαι ἐν τοῖς ἀπομνημονεύμασαι
αὐτοῦ γεγενημένον καὶ τοῦτο, μετὰ τοῦ καὶ, κ. τ. λ. Dial. cum Tryph.,
106. Here the pronoun αὐτοῦ probably refers to Peter. And the expression
<q>his memoirs</q> can hardly mean Mark's gospel, since Jerome
is the first that calls it such.</note> He had also the older Acts of Pilate. Paul's
epistles are never mentioned, though he doubtless knew
them. Having little sympathy with Paulinism he attached
his belief much more to the primitive apostles. The Apocalypse,
1 Peter, and 1 John he esteemed highly; the epistle
to the Hebrews and the Acts he treated in the same way as
the Pauline writings. Justin's canon, as far as divine authority
and inspiration are concerned, was the Old Testament.
He was merely on the threshold of a divine canon
made up of primitive Christian writings, and attributed no
exclusive sanctity to those he used because they were not
to him the only source of doctrine. Even of the Apocalypse he says, <q>A man among us
named John, &amp;c., wrote it.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dialogus</hi>,
part ii., p. 315, ed. Thirlby. Comp. on Justin, Tjeenk-Willink's
<hi rend='italic'>Justinus Martyr in zijne Verhouding tot Paulus</hi>.</note>
In his time none of the gospels had been canonized, not
even the synoptists, if, indeed, he knew them all. Oral
tradition was the chief fountain of Christian knowledge, as
it had been for a century. In his opinion this tradition was
embodied in writing; but the documents in which he looked
for all that related to Christ were not the gospels alone.
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
He used others freely, not looking upon any as <emph>inspired</emph>,
for that idea could arise only when a selection was made
among the current documents. He regarded them all as
having been written down from memory, and judged them
by criteria of evidence conformable to the Old Testament
Scriptures. Though lessons out of Gospels (some of our
present ones and others), as also out of the prophets, were read in assemblies
on the first day of the week,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Apolog.</hi>
i. 97, ed. Thirlby.</note> the act of
converting the Christian writings into <emph>Scripture</emph> was posterior;
for the mere reading of a gospel in churches on Sunday
does not prove that it was considered divinely authoritative;
and the use of the epistles, which formed the second and
less valued part of the collection, must still have been
limited.
</p>

<p>
Justin's disciple, Tatian (160-180 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>),
wrote a <hi rend='italic'>Diatessaron</hi>
or harmony of the gospels, which began, according to
Ephrem Syrus, with John i. 1; but our knowledge of it is
uncertain. The author omitted the genealogies of Jesus
and everything belonging to His Davidic descent. He
seems also to have put into it particulars derived from
extra-canonical sources such as the Gospel according to the
Hebrews. Doubtless he was acquainted with Paul's writings,
as statements made in them are quoted; but he dealt
freely with them according to Eusebius, and even rejected several epistles,
probably first and second Timothy.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hieronymi
Prooem.</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Epist. ad Titum.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In Polycarp's epistle (about 160 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), which is liable to
strong suspicions of having been written after the death of
the bishop,<note place='foot'>Comp. chap. xii., where γραφαί is applied to the apostolic
epistles; a title they did not receive so early as the age of Polycarp. Zahn
himself admits this.</note> there are reminiscences of the synoptic gospels;
and most of Paul's epistles as well as I Peter were used by
the writer. But the idea of canonical authority, or a peculiar
inspiration belonging to these writings, is absent.
</p>

<p>
The author of the second Clementine epistle (about 150-160)
had not a New Testament canon made up of the four
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
gospels and epistles. His <emph>Scripture</emph> was the Old Testament,
to which is applied the epithet <q>the Books</q> or <q>the Bible;</q>
and the words of Christ. <q>The Apostles</q> immediately subjoined
to <q>the Books,</q> does not mean the New Testament,
or a special collection of the apostolic epistles, as has been
supposed.<note place='foot'>Chapter xiv. 2.</note>
The preacher employed a gospel or gospels as
<emph>Scripture</emph>; perhaps those of Matthew and Luke, not the
whole documents, but the parts containing the words of
Christ.<note place='foot'>Chapter ii. 4.</note>
He also used the Gospel of the Egyptians as an
authoritative document, and quoted his sources freely. With
the Johannine writings he seems to have been unacquainted.<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Clementis Romani ad Corinthios quae discuntur epistulae, ed.
de Gebhardt et Harnack</hi>, 2., sec. 10, Prolegomena.</note>
</p>

<p>
Athenagoras of Athens wrote an apology addressed to
Marcus Aurelius (176 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>). In it he uses written and unwritten
tradition, testing all by the Old Testament which
was his only authoritative canon. He makes no reference to
the Christian documents, but adduces words of Jesus with
the verb <q>he says.</q> It is not clear whether he quoted
from the Synoptics; perhaps the passages which are parallel
to Matthew v. 44, 45, 46,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Legat. pro Christ.</hi>
II, 12.</note> and Mark x. 6,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
33.</note> were taken
from these; but the matter is somewhat uncertain. His
treatise on the resurrection appeals to a passage in one of
Paul's epistles.<note place='foot'>Chapter xviii.</note>
</p>

<p>
Dionysius of Corinth ( 170 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) complains of the falsification
of his writings, but consoles himself with the fact
that the same is done to the <q>Scriptures of the Lord,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
the gospels containing the Lord's words; or rather the two
parts of the early collection, <q>the gospel</q> and <q>the apostle</q>
together; which agrees best with the age and tenor of his
letters.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ap.</hi> Euseb.
H. E., iv. 23.</note> If such be the meaning, the collection is put on a
par with the Old Testament, and regarded as inspired.
</p>

<p>
In the second epistle of Peter (about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 170) Paul's
epistles are regarded as Scripture (iii. 16.) This seems to
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
be the earliest example of the canonizing of any New Testament
portion. Here a brotherly recognition of the Gentile
apostle and his productions takes the place of former opposition.
A false interpretation of his epistles is even supposed
to have induced a departure from primitive apostolic Christianity.
</p>

<p>
The letter of the churches at Vienne and Lyons (177 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>)
has quotations from the epistles to the Romans, Philippians,
1 Timothy, 1 Peter, Acts, the gospels of Luke and John, the Apocalypse. The last
is expressly called <emph>Scripture</emph>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ap</hi>.
Euseb. H. E., v. 1, p. 144, ed. Bright.</note>
This shows a fusion of the two original tendencies, the
Petrine and Pauline; and the formation of a Catholic church
with a common canon of authority. Accordingly, the two
apostles, Peter and Paul, are mentioned together.
</p>

<p>
Theophilus of Antioch (180 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) was familiar with the
gospels and most of Paul's epistles, as also the Apocalypse.
Passages are cited from Paul as <q>the divine word.</q><note place='foot'>θεῖος λόγος.
<hi rend='italic'>Ad Autolycum</hi>, iii. 14, p. 1141, ed Migne.</note> He
ascribes the fourth gospel to John, calling him an inspired
man, like the Old Testament prophets.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
ii. 22.</note> We also learn
from Jerome that he commented on the gospels put together
by way of harmony.<note place='foot'>Epist. 151, ad Algasiam.</note>
</p>

<p>
The author of the epistle to Diognetus (about 200 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>)
shows his acquaintance with the gospels and Paul's epistles;
but he never cites the New Testament by way of proof.
Words are introduced into his discourse, in passing and
from memory.<note place='foot'>See Overbeck's <hi rend='italic'>Studien
zur Geschichte der alten Kirche, Abhandlung</hi>
I., in which the date of the letter is brought down till after Constantine.
Surely this is too late.</note>
</p>

<p>
The conception of a Catholic <emph>canon</emph> was realized about the
same time as that of a Catholic <emph>church</emph>. One hundred and
seventy years from the coming of Christ elapsed before the
collection assumed a form that carried with it the idea of
<emph>holy</emph> and <emph>inspired</emph>.<note place='foot'>Davidson's
<hi rend='italic'>Introduction to the Study of the New Testament</hi>, vol.
ii. p. 508, &amp;c.</note> The way in which it was done was by
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
raising the apostolic writings higher and higher till they
were of equal authority with the Old Testament, so that the
church might have a rule of appeal. But by lifting the
Christian productions up to the level of the old Jewish ones,
injury was done to that living consciousness which feels
the opposition between spirit and letter; the latter writings
tacitly assuming or keeping the character of a perfect rule
even as to form. The Old Testament was not brought
down to the New; the New was raised to the Old. It is
clear that the earliest church fathers did not use the books
of the New Testament as sacred documents clothed with
divine authority, but followed for the most part, at least till
the middle of the second century, apostolic tradition orally
transmitted. They were not solicitous about a canon circumscribed
within certain limits.
</p>

<p>
In the second half, then, of the second century there was
a canon of the New Testament consisting of two parts called
<emph>the gospel</emph><note place='foot'>τὸ εὐαγγέλιον.</note>
and <emph>the apostle</emph>.<note place='foot'>ὁ ἀπόστολος.</note>
The first was complete, containing
the four gospels alone; the second, which was incomplete,
contained the Acts of the Apostles and epistles, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
thirteen letters of Paul, one of Peter, one of John, and the
Revelation. How and where this canon originated is uncertain.
Its birthplace may have been Asia Minor, like
Marcion's; but it may have grown about the same time in
Asia Minor, Alexandria, and Western Africa. At all events,
Irenæus, Clement of Alexandria, and Tertullian agree in
recognizing its existence.
</p>

<p>
Irenæus had a canon which he adopted as apostolic. In
his view it was of binding force and authoritative. This
contained the four gospels, the Acts, thirteen epistles of
Paul, the first epistle of John, and the Revelation. He had
also a sort of appendix or deutero-canon, which he highly
esteemed without putting it on a par with the received collection,
consisting of John's second epistle, the first of Peter,
and the Shepherd of Hermas. The last he calls
<emph>Scripture</emph>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adves. Hæres.</hi>,
iv. 20, 2.</note>
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
The epistle to the Hebrews, that of Jude, James's, second
Peter, and third John he ignored.
</p>

<p>
Clement's collection was more extended than Irenæus'.
His appendix or deutero-canon included the epistle to the
Hebrews, 2 John, Jude, the Apocalypse of Peter, the Shepherd
of Hermas, the Epistles of Clement and Barnabas. He
recognized no obligatory canon, distinct and of paramount
authority. But he separated the New Testament writings
by their traditionally apostolic character and the degree of
importance attached to them. He did not attach the modern
idea of <emph>canonical</emph> in opposition to <emph>non-canonical</emph>, either to the
four gospels or any other part of the New Testament.
Barnabas is cited as an apostle.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Stromateis</hi>,
ii. 6, p. 965, ed. Migne.</note> So is the Roman
Clement.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, iv. 17, p. 1312.</note>
The Shepherd of Hermas is spoken of as
<emph>divine</emph>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
i. 29, p. 928.</note> Thus the
line of the Homologoumena is not marked off even to the
same extent as in Irenæus.
</p>

<p>
Tertullian's canon consisted of the gospels, Acts, thirteen
epistles of Paul, the Apocalypse, and 1 John. As an appendix
he had the epistle to the Hebrews, that of Jude, the
Shepherd of Hermas, 2 John probably, and 1 Peter. This
deutero-canon was not regarded as authoritative. No trace
occurs in his works of James' epistle, 2 Peter, and 3 John. He used the Shepherd,
calling it <emph>Scripture</emph>,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Oratione</hi>,
cap. 12.</note> without implying,
however, that he put it on a par with the usually acknowledged
canonical writings; but after he became a
Montanist, he repudiated it as the apocryphal Shepherd of
adulterers, <q>put among the apocryphal and false, by every
council of the churches.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Pudicitia</hi>,
cap. 10-20.</note> It was <emph>not</emph>, however, reckoned
among the spurious and false writings, either at Rome or
Carthage, in the time of Tertullian. It was merely placed
outside the universally received works by the western
churches of that day.
</p>

<p>
These three fathers did not fix the canon absolutely. Its
limits were still unsettled. But they sanctioned most of the
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
books now accepted as divine, putting some extra-canonical
productions almost on the same level with the rest, if not in
theory, at least in practice.
</p>

<p>
The canon of Muratori is a fragmentary list which was
made towards the end of the second century (170 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>).
Its birthplace is uncertain, though there are traces of
Roman origin. Its translation from the Greek is assumed,
but that is uncertain. It begins with the four gospels in
the usual order, and proceeds to the Acts, thirteen epistles
of Paul, the epistles of John, that of Jude, and the Apocalypse.
The epistle to the Hebrews, 1 and 2 Peter, 1 John
and James are not named. The Apocalypse of Peter is also
mentioned, but as not universally received. Of the Shepherd
of Hermas, it is stated that it may be read in the
Church. The epistle <q>to the Laodiceans</q> may either be
that to the Ephesians, which had such superscription in
Marcion's canon, or less probably the supposititious epistle
mentioned in the codex Boernerianus,<note place='foot'>G. of St.
Paul's epistles, a MS. of the ninth century according to
Tischendorf.</note> after that to Philemon,
and often referred to in the middle ages.<note place='foot'>See Anger's
<hi rend='italic'>Ueber den Laodicener Brief</hi>, 1843.</note> That <q>to
the Alexandrians</q> is probably the epistle to the Hebrews;
though this has been denied without sufficient reason. According
to the usual punctuation, both are said to have been
forged in Paul's name, an opinion which may have been
entertained among Roman Christians about 170 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> The
Epistle to the Hebrews was rejected in the west, and may
have been thought a supposititious work in the interests of Paulinism, with some
reason because of its internal character,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Fertur etiam ad Laudecences alia ad Alexandrinos Pauli nomine
fincte ad hesem Marcionis el alia plura quæ in Catholicam ecclesiam
recepi non potest.</foreign> Perhaps a comma should be put after
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nomine</foreign>, and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fincte</foreign> joined to what follows, to the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>alia plura</foreign>
said to be forged in the interest of Marcion.</note>
which is at least semi-Pauline, though its Judaistic
basis is apparent. The story about the origin of the fourth
gospel with its apostolic and episcopal attestation, evinces
a desire to establish the authenticity of a work which had
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
not obtained universal acceptance at the time.<note place='foot'><foreign
lang='la' rend='italic'>Quarti evangeliorum Johannis ex discipulis cohortantibus
condiscipulis et episcopis suis dixit conjejunate mihi odie triduo el quid cuique
fuerit revelatum alterutrum nobis ennarremus eadem nocte revelatum
Andreæ ex apostolis ut recogniscentibus cunctis Johannis suo nomine
cuncta discriberet.</foreign></note> It is difficult
to make out the meaning in various places; and there
is considerable diversity of opinion among expositors of the
document.<note place='foot'>It is printed
and largely commented on by Credner in his <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
des neutestamentlichen Kanon</hi> edited by Volkmar, p. 141, &amp;c.,
and by Westcott <hi rend='italic'>On the Canon</hi>, Appendix C, p. 466, 2d edition. Many
others have explained it; especially Hilgenfeld.</note> In accord with these facts we
find Serapion bishop of the church at Rhossus, in Cilicia,<note place='foot'>About
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 190.</note> allowing the
public use of the gospel of Peter;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Euseb.</hi>
H. E. vi. 12.</note> which shows that there
was no exclusive gospel-canon at the end of the second century,
at least in Syria. The present canon had not then
pervaded the churches in general.
</p>

<p>
What is the result of an examination of the Christian
literature belonging to the second century? Is it that a
canon was then fixed, separating some books from others
by a line so clear, that those on one side of it were alone
reckoned inspired, authoritative, of apostolic origin or sanction;
while those on the other were considered uninspired,
unauthoritative, without claim to apostolicity, unauthentic?
Was the separation between them made on any clear principle
or demarcation? It cannot be said so. The century
witnessed no such fact, but merely the incipient efforts to
bring it about. The discriminating process was begun, not
completed. It was partly forced upon the prominent advocates
of a policy which sought to consolidate the Jewish and
Gentile-Christian parties, after the decline of their mutual
antagonism, into a united church. They were glad to
transfer the current belief in the infallible inspiration of the
Old Testament, to selected Christian writings, as an effective
means of defence against those whom they considered outside
a new organization&mdash;the Catholic Church.
</p>

<p>
The stichometrical list of the Old and New Testament
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
Scriptures in the Latin of the Clermont MS. (D), was that
<emph>read</emph> in the African Church in the third century. It is
peculiar. After the Pentateuch, Joshua, Judges, Ruth,
and the historical books, follow Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
Canticles, Wisdom, Sirach, the twelve minor prophets,
the four greater; three books of the Maccabees, Judith,
Esdras, Esther, Job, and Tobit. In the New Testament,
the four gospels, Matthew, John, Mark, Luke, are succeeded
by ten epistles of Paul, two of Peter, the epistle of James,
three of John, and that of Jude. The epistle to the Hebrews
(characterized as that of Barnabas), the Revelation of John,
Acts of the Apostles, the Shepherd of Hermas, the Acts of
Paul, the Revelation of Peter, follow. The last three constitute
a sort of appendix; and the number of their verses
is given. It is possible that the carelessness of a transcriber
may have caused some of the singularities observable in this
list; such as the omission of the epistles to the Philippians
and Thessalonians; but the end shows a freer idea of books
fit for reading than what was usual even at that early time
in the African Church.<note place='foot'>Tischendorf edited
the Pauline epistles from this MS. Lipsiæ, 1852.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Syria a version of the New Testament for the use of
the church was made early in the third century. This work,
commonly called the Peshito, wants 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John,
Jude, and the Apocalypse. It has, however, all the other
books, including the epistle of James and that to the Hebrews.
The last two were received as apostolic.
</p>

<p>
Towards the middle of the third century, Origen's<note place='foot'>Died
254 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> testimony
respecting the Canon is of great value. He seems to
have distinguished three classes of books&mdash;authentic ones,
whose apostolic origin was generally admitted, those not authentic,
and a middle-class not generally recognized or in regard
to which his own opinion wavered. The first contained
those already adopted at the beginning of the century both
in the East and West, with the Apocalypse, and the epistle
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
to the Hebrews <emph>so far as it contains Pauline ideas</emph>;<note place='foot'>τὰ
ἐν τῇ διαθήκη βιβλία, ἐνδιάθηκα, ὁμολογούμενα.</note> to the
second belongs the Shepherd of Hermas, though he sometimes
hesitated a little about it,<note place='foot'>In one place,
however, he calls it <emph>very useful and divinely inspired</emph>.
<hi rend='italic'>Comment. in ep. ad Roman.</hi>, xvi.
14.</note> the epistle of Barnabas, the
Acts of Paul, the gospel according to the Hebrews, the
gospel of the Egyptians, and the preaching of Peter;<note place='foot'>νόθα.</note>
to the third, the epistle of James, that of Jude, 2 Peter, 2 and 3
John.<note place='foot'>Ap. Euseb, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccles.</hi>,
vi. 25; iii. 25, ἀντιλεγόμενα.</note> The separation of the
various writings is not formally
made, nor does Origen give a list of them. His
classification is gathered from his works; and though its
application admitted of considerable latitude, he is cautious
enough, appealing to the tradition of the church, and throwing
in qualifying expressions.<note place='foot'>See Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>H. E.</hi>
vi. 25. <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in Malth.</hi>, iii. p. 463;
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, p. 814; <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in ep. ad Roman.</hi>,
iv. p. 683; <hi rend='italic'>in Matth.</hi>, iii. p. 644;
<hi rend='italic'>Homil.</hi> viii. <hi rend='italic'>in Numb.</hi>, ii. p. 294;
<hi rend='italic'>Contra Cels.</hi>, i. 63, p. 378; <hi rend='italic'>De Principiis
præf.</hi>, i. p. 49. <hi rend='italic'>Opp.</hi>, ed. Delarue.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Canon of Eusebius<note place='foot'>Died 340 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
is given at length in his <hi rend='italic'>Ecclesiastical
History</hi>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccles.</hi>, iii. 25;
also 31, 39; vi. 13, 14.</note> He divides the books into three classes, containing
those writings <emph>generally received</emph>,<note place='foot'>ὁμολογούμενα,
ἐνδιάθηκα, ἀναμφίλεκτα, ἀναντίρρητα.</note> those
<emph>controverted</emph>,<note place='foot'>ἀντιλεγόμενα, γνώριμα δὲ τοῖς πολλοῖς,
ἐν πλείσταις ἐκκλησίαις δεδημοσιευμένα, νόθα.</note>
and the <emph>heretical</emph>.<note place='foot'>ἄτοπα πάντη καὶ δυσσεβῆ;
παντελῶς νόθα (iii. 31).</note> The first has the four gospels, the
Acts, thirteen epistles of Paul, 1 John, 1 Peter, the Apocalypse.<note place='foot'>This
last with the qualification εἴγε φανείη. In another place he
states that it was rejected by some, and therefore it is also along with
the ἀντιλεγόμενα or νόθα.</note>
The second class is subdivided into two, the first
corresponding to Origen's <emph>mixed</emph><note place='foot'>μικτά.</note> or
<emph>intermediate</emph> writings,
the second to his <emph>spurious</emph><note place='foot'>νόθα.</note>
ones. The former subdivision
contains the epistle of James, 2 Peter, Jude, 2 and 3 John;
the latter, the Acts of Paul, the Shepherd, the Revelation of
Peter, the epistle of Barnabas, the Doctrines of the Apostles,
the Apocalypse of John, the gospel according to the Hebrews.
The third class has the gospels of Peter, of Thomas, the
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
traditions of Matthias, the Acts of Peter, Andrew, and John.
The subdivisions of the second class are indefinite. The
only distinction which Eusebius puts between them is that
of ecclesiastical use. Though he classes as <emph>spurious</emph> the
Acts of Paul, the Shepherd, the Revelation of Peter, the
epistle of Barnabas, the doctrines of the Apostles, the Apocalypse
of John, the gospel according to the Hebrews, and
does not apply the epithet to the epistle of James, the 2 of
Peter, 2 and 3 John; he uses of James's in one place the
verb <emph>to be counted spurious</emph>.<note place='foot'>νοθεύομαι.
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccles.</hi>, ii. 23. Christophorson, Schmid, and Hug
think that Eusebius gave the opinion of others in this word: but it is
more likely that he gave his own, as Valesius thinks. See the note in
Schmid's <hi rend='italic'>Historia antiqua et vindicatio Canonis, &amp;c.</hi>, p.
358.</note> In like manner he speaks of the Apocalypse of Peter and the epistle of
Barnabas as <emph>controverted</emph>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
vi. 14.</note>
The <emph>mixed</emph> or <emph>spurious</emph> of Origen are vaguely
separated by Eusebius; both come under the general head
of the <emph>controverted</emph>; for after specifying them separately he
sums up, <q>all these will belong to the class of the <emph>controverted</emph>,</q>
the very class already described as containing
<q>books well known and recognized by most,</q> implying also
that they were read in the churches.<note place='foot'>See Weber's
<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Geschichte des neutestamentlichen
Kanons</hi>, p. 142, &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is somewhat remarkable that Eusebius does not mention
the Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians in this list.
But he speaks of it in another place as a production whose
authenticity was generally acknowledged,<note place='foot'>ὁμολογουμένη.
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccles.</hi>, iii. 16.</note> and of its public
use in most churches both formerly and in his own time.
This wide-spread reading of it did not <emph>necessarily</emph> imply
canonicity; but the mode in which Eusebius characterizes
it, and its extensive use in public, favor the idea that in
many churches it was almost put on equality with the productions
commonly regarded as authoritative. The canonical
list was not fixed immovably in the time of Eusebius.
Opinions about books varied, as they had done before.
</p>

<p>
The testimony of Eusebius regarding the canon, important
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
as it is, has less weight because of the historian's
credulity. One who believed in the authenticity of Abgar's
letters to Christ, and in the canon of the four gospels at the
time of Trajan, cannot take rank as a judicious collector or
sifter of facts.
</p>

<p>
About 332 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> the Emperor Constantine entrusted
Eusebius with the commission to make out a complete collection
of the sacred Christian writings for the use of the
Catholic Church. How this order was executed we are not
told. But Credner is probably correct in saying that the
code consisted of all that is now in the New Testament
except the Revelation. The fifty copies which were made
must have supplied Constantinople and the Greek Church
for a considerable time with an authoritative canon.
</p>

<p>
Eusebius's catalogue agrees in substance with that of
Origen's. The historian followed ecclesiastical tradition.
He inquired diligently into the prevailing opinions of the
Christian churches and writers, with the views held by
others before and contemporaneously with himself, but
could not attain to a decided result. His hesitation stood
in the way of a clear, firm, view of the question. The tradition
respecting certain books was still wavering, and he
was unable to fix it. Authority fettered his independent
judgment. That he was inconsistent and confused does
not need to be shown.
</p>

<p>
The exact principles that guided the formation of a canon
in the earliest centuries cannot be discovered. Strictly
speaking there were none. Definite grounds for the reception
or rejection of books were not apprehended. The
choice was determined by various circumstances, of which
apostolic origin was the chief, though this itself was
insufficiently attested; for if it be asked whether all the New
Testament writings proceeded from the authors whose
names they bear, criticism cannot reply in the affirmative.
The example and influence of churches to which the writings
had been first addressed must have acted upon the
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
reception of books. Above all, individual teachers here and
there saw the necessity of meeting heretics with their own
weapons, in their own way, with <emph>apostolic records</emph> instead of
oral tradition. The circumstances in which the orthodox
were placed led to this step, effecting a bond of union whose
need must have been felt while each church was isolated
under its own bishop and the collective body could not take
measures in common. Writings of more recent origin would
be received with greater facility than such as had been in circulation
for many years, especially if they professed to come
from a prominent apostle. A code of apostolic writings, divine
and perfect like the Old Testament, had to be presented
as soon as possible against Gnostic and Manichæan heretics
whose doctrines were injurious to objective Christianity;
while the multiplication of apocryphal works threatened to
overwhelm genuine tradition with a heap of superstition.
The Petrine and Pauline Christians, now amalgamated to a
great extent, agreed in hastening the canon-process.
</p>

<p>
The infancy of the canon was cradled in an uncritical
age, and rocked with traditional ease. Conscientious care
was not directed from the first to the well-authenticated
testimony of eye-witnesses. Of the three fathers who contributed
most to its early growth, Irenæus was credulous
and blundering; Tertullian passionate and one-sided; and
Clement of Alexandria, imbued with the treasures of Greek
wisdom, was mainly occupied with ecclesiastical ethics.
Irenæus argues that the gospels should be four in number,
neither more nor less, because there are four universal winds
and four quarters of the world. The Word or Architect of
all things gave the gospel in a fourfold shape. According
to this father, the apostles were fully informed concerning
all things, and had a perfect knowledge, after their Lord's
ascension. Matthew wrote his gospel while Peter and Paul were preaching
in Rome and founding the church.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adversus
Hæres</hi>, iii., II, 8. </note> Such
assertions show both ignorance and exaggeration.
</p>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<p>
Tertullian affirms that the <emph>tradition of the apostolic churches</emph>
guarantees the four gospels,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adv.
Marc.</hi> iv. 5.</note> and refers his readers to the
churches of Corinth, Philippi, Ephesus, &amp;c., for the <emph>authentic
epistles</emph> of Paul.<note place='foot'> <hi rend='italic'>De præscript.
hæret.</hi> c. 36.</note> What is this but the rhetoric of an enthusiast?
In like manner he states that bishops were appointed
by the apostles, and that they existed from that time downward,
the succession originating so early.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De præscript.
hæret.</hi> c. 32.</note>
</p>

<p>
Clement contradicts himself in making Peter authorize
Mark's gospel to be read in the churches; while in another
place he says that the apostle neither <q>forbad nor encouraged
it.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ap. Euseb. Hist. Eccles.</hi>
ii. 15 and vi. 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
The three fathers of whom we are speaking, had neither
the ability nor the inclination to examine the genesis of
documents surrounded with an apostolic halo. No analysis
of their authenticity and genuineness was seriously attempted
either by them or by the men of their time. In its
absence, custom, accident, taste, practical needs directed the
tendency of tradition. All the rhetoric employed to throw
the value of their testimony as far back as possible, even
up to or at least very near the apostle John is of the vaguest
sort. Appeals to the continuity of tradition and of church
doctrine, to the exceptional veneration of these fathers for
the gospels, to their opinions being formed earlier than the
composition of the works in which they are expressed, possess
no force. The ends which the fathers in question had
in view, their polemic motives, their uncritical, inconsistent
assertions, their want of sure data, detract from their testimony.
Their decisions were much more the result of pious
feeling biased by the theological speculations of the times,
than the conclusions of a sound judgment. The very arguments
they use to establish certain conclusions show weakness
of perception. What are the manifestations of spiritual
feeling, compared with the results of logical reasoning?
Are they more trustworthy than the latter? Certainly not,
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
at least in relation to questions of evidence. It is true that
their testimony has a value; but it is one proportionate to
the degree of credibility attaching to witnesses circumstanced
as they were, whose separation of canonical from
uncanonical gospels, or rather their canonizing of certain
writings apart from others, and their claiming of inspiration
for the authors of the former, must be judged by the reasonableness
of the thing itself, in connection with men of their
type. The second century abounded in pseudonymous
literature; and the early fathers, as well as the churches,
were occupied with other things than the sifting of evidence
connected with writings considerably prior to their own
time. The increase of such apocryphal productions, gospels,
acts, and apocalypses among the heretical parties stimulated
the orthodox bishops and churches to make an authentic
collection; but it increased the difficulties of the task.
</p>

<p>
Textual criticism has been employed to discredit the true
dates of the present gospels; and the most exaggerated descriptions
have been given of the frequent transcription of
the text and its great corruption in the second century.
The process of corruption in the course of frequent transcription
has been transferred even to the first century. It
is true that the gospels at the end of that century exhibited
a text which bears marks of transcription, interpolation,
and addition; but they were not the complete works as we
have them now, being then but in progress, except the
fourth. The assumption that <q>advanced corruption</q> existed
in the present text of the synoptists as early as the
first century is gratuitous; unless the process by which
they were gradually built up is so called. No attempt to
get a long history behind the canonical gospels at the close
of the first century out of <q>advanced corruption</q> can be
successful. It is attested by no Christian writer of the
century; and those in the first half of the second, both heretical
and orthodox, did themselves treat the text in a
manner far short of its implied infallibility. The various
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
readings with which they had to do, do not carry up <emph>the canonical
gospels</emph> far into the first century. The transcription,
enlargement, and interpolation of the materials which make
up the body of them, must not be identified with the corruption
of their <emph>completed texts</emph>, in order that the latter may be
relegated to an early period; for the synoptists did not
come forth full-blown, each from the hand of a single person.
The old Latin version or versions used by Tertullian and
the interpreter of Irenæus, have been pressed into the same
service, but in vain.
</p>

<p>
In like manner the Curetonian Syriac version of the gospels
has been put as early as possible into the second
century, though it can hardly have been prior to the very
close of it, or rather to the beginning of the third. Here
the strong assertions of apologetic writers have been freely
scattered abroad. But the evidence in favor of the authors
traditionally assigned to the gospels and some of the epistles,
is still uncertain. A wide gap intervenes between eye-witnesses
of the apostles or apostolic men that wrote the sacred
books, and the earliest fathers who assert such authorship.
The traditional bridge between them is a precarious one. As
the chasm cannot be filled by adequate external evidence,
we are thrown back on the internal character of the works
themselves. One thing appears from the early corruption
of the sacred records spoken of by Irenæus, Origen, and
others, that they were not regarded with the veneration
necessarily attaching to infallible documents. Their being
freely handled excludes the idea of rigid canonization. The
men who first canonized them had no certain knowledge of
their authors. To them, that knowledge had been obscured
or lost; though a sagacious criticism might have arrived at
the true state of the question even in their day.
</p>

<p>
In the sub-apostolic age Ebionitism passed into Catholicism,
Jewish into Pauline Christianity, the mythical and
marvelous into the dogmatic, the traditional into the historic,
the legendary into the literary. The conflict of parties
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
within the sphere of Christianity gave rise to productions
of various tendencies which reflected the circumstances out
of which they arose. These were accepted or rejected by
the churches according to the prevailing opinions of the
persons composing the churches. Common usage led to
the authorization of some; others were neglected. The
state of the second century in its beliefs, credulity, idiosyncracies
of prominent teachers, antagonistic opinions and
mystic speculations, throws a light upon the New Testament
writings and especially on the formation of the canon, which
explains their genesis. Two things stand out most clearly,
the comparatively late idea of a <emph>canonical</emph> New Testament
literature; and the absence of critical principles in determining
it. The former was not entertained till the latter part
of the second century. The conception of canonicity and
inspiration attaching to New Testament books did not exist
till the time of Irenæus.
</p>

<p>
When it is asked, to whom do we owe the canon? the
usual answer is, to the Church. This is true only in a
sense. The unity attributed to Christians before Irenæus
and Tertullian, consisted in their religious consciousness.
It was subjective. The idea of <emph>the church</emph> was that of inward
fellowship&mdash;the fellowship of the spirit rather than an
outward organism. The preservation of the early Christian
writings was owing, in the first instance, to the congregations
to whom they were sent, and the neighboring ones
with whom such congregations had friendly connection.
The care of them devolved on the most influential teachers,&mdash;on
those who occupied leading positions in the chief
cities, or were most interested in apostolic writings as a
source of instruction. The Christian books were mostly in
the hands of the bishops. In process of time the canon was
the care of assemblies or councils. But it had been made
before the first general council by a few leading fathers towards
the end of the second century in different countries.
The formation of a Catholic Church and of a canon was
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
simultaneous. The circumstances in which the collection
originated were unfavorable to the authenticity of its materials,
for tradition had been busy over them and their
authors. Instead of attributing the formation of the canon
to the Church, it would be more correct to say that the
important stage in it was due to three teachers, each working
separately and in his own way, who were intent upon
the creation of a Christian society which did not appear in
the apostolic age,&mdash;a visible organization united in faith,&mdash;where
the discordant opinions of apostolic and sub-apostolic
times should be finally merged. The canon was not the
work of the Christian Church so much as of the men who
were striving to form that Church, and could not get beyond
the mould received by primitive Christian literature.
The first mention of a <emph>Catholic Church</emph> occurs in <hi rend='italic'>The
Martyrdom of Polycarp</hi>, an epistle that cannot be dated earlier than
160 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, and may perhaps be ten years later. But though
the idea is there, its established use is due to Irenæus, Tertullian,
and Cyprian. The expression has a different and
narrow sense in the seven Ignatian epistles which we believe
to be supposititious and later than Justin. Neither the
three epistles published in Syriac by Cureton, nor the seven
Greek ones enumerated by Eusebius are authentic; though
Zahn has tried to prove the latter such, dating them <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
144. His arguments, however, are far from convincing;
and the whole story of<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ignatius von
Antiochien</hi>, 1873; and Prolegomena to the <hi rend='italic'>Patrum
Apostolicorum opera</hi>, by de Gebhardt, Harnack, and Zahn, Fasciculus,
ii.</note> Ignatius's martyrdom at Rome
rather than Antioch is still doubtful; for the circumstances
under which he is said to have been dragged to Rome, and
his writing letters to the churches by the way, are highly
improbable. The testimony of Malalas that Ignatius suffered
at Antioch in December, 115, in the presence of Trajan,
may be quite as good as that of Chrysostom and the Syriac
monthly calendar on which Zahn relies so confidently. The
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
fact of the priority of the last two to Malalas is of little
weight as evidence. The main point is <emph>the locality</emph> in which
Ignatius suffered; which Malalas, himself a native of Antioch
and a historian, ought to have known better than
Chrysostom, because he copied preceding historians.
</p>

<p>
It is necessary to be precise on this subject because some
speak of <emph>the church</emph> as though it were contemporary with
the apostles themselves, or at least with their immediate
disciples; and proceed to argue that dissensions arose soon
after <q>within the church</q> rendering an appeal to the written
word necessary. When the authority of <emph>traditional
teaching</emph> gave way to that of <emph>a written rule</emph>, a change came
over the condition of <emph>the church</emph>. Such a view tends to mislead.
There were dissensions among the earliest Christians.
The apostles themselves were by no means unanimous.
Important differences of belief divided the Jewish and Gentile
Christians from the beginning. The types of Christian
truth existing from the first gradually coalesced about the
middle of the second century; when heretics, especially the
Gnostics, appeared so formidable that a catholic church was
developed. Along with this process, and as an important
element in it, the writings of apostles and apostolic men
were uncritically taken from tradition and elevated to the
rank of divine documents. It was not the rise of new dissensions
<q>within the church</q> which led to the first formation
of a Christian canon; rather did the new idea of <q>a
catholic church</q> require a standard of appeal in apostolic
writings, which were now invested with an authority that
did not belong to them from the beginning.
</p>

<p>
Origen was the first who took a somewhat scientific view
of the relative value belonging to the different parts of the
biblical collection. His examination of the canon was
critical. Before him the leading books had been regarded
as divine and sacred, the source of doctrinal and historic
truth. From this stand-point he did not depart. With him
ecclesiastical tradition was a prevailing principle in the recognition
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
of books belonging of right to the New Testament
collection. He was also guided by the inspiration of the
authors; a criterion arbitrary in its application, as his own
statements show. In his time, however, the collection was
being gradually enlarged; his third class. <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
<emph>the mixed</emph>,
approaching reception into the first. But amid all the fluctuations
of opinion to which certain portions of the New
Testament were subject, and the unscientific procedure both
of fathers and churches in the matter, though councils had
not met to discuss it, and vague tradition had strengthened
with time, a certain spiritual consciousness manifested itself
throughout the East and West in the matter of the
canon. Tolerable unanimity ensued. The result was a
remarkable one, and calls for our gratitude, notwithstanding
its defects. Though the development was pervaded by no
critical or definite principle, it ended in a canon which has
maintained its validity for centuries.
</p>

<p>
It is sometimes said that the history of the canon should
be sought from definite catalogues, not from isolated quotations.
The latter are supposed to be of slight value, the
former to be the result of deliberate judgment. This remark
is more specious than solid. In relation to the Old
Testament, the catalogues given by the fathers, as by Melito
and Origen, rest solely on the tradition of the Jews; apart
from which they have no independent authority. As none
except Jerome and Origen knew Hebrew, their lists of the
Old Testament books are simply a reflection of what they
learned from others. If they deviate in practice from their
masters by quoting as Scripture other than the canonical
books, they show their judgment over-riding an external
theory. The very men who give a list of the Jewish books
evince an inclination to the Christian and enlarged canon.
So Origen says, in his <hi rend='italic'>Epistle to Africanus</hi>, that <q>the
churches use Tobit.</q> In explaining the prophet Isaiah,
Jerome employs Sirach vi. 6, in proof of his view, remarking
that the apocryphal work is in the Christian catalogue.
</p>

<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>

<p>
In like manner Epiphanius, in a passage against Aetius,
after referring to the books of Scripture, adds, <q>as well as
the books of Wisdom, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Wisdom of Solomon and of
Jesus, son of Sirach; finally, all the other books of Scripture.</q>
In another place he gives the canon of the Jews
historically, and excludes the apocryphal Greek books; here
he includes some of the latter. We also learn from Jerome
that Judith was in the number of the books reckoned up by
the Nicene Council. Thus the fathers who give catalogues
of the Old Testament show the existence of a Jewish and a
Christian canon in relation to the Old Testament; the latter
wider than the former; their private opinion being more
favorable to the one, though the other was historically
transmitted. In relation to the New Testament, the synods
which drew up lists of the sacred books show the view of
some leading father like Augustine, along with what custom
had sanctioned. In this department no member of the
synod exercised his critical faculty; a number together
would decide such questions summarily. Bishops proceed
in the track of tradition or authority.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. The Bible Canon From The Fourth Century To The Reformation.</head>

<p>
It will now be convenient to treat of the two Testaments
together, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, <emph>the canon of the Bible</emph>. The canons
of both have been considered separately to the end of the third
century; they may be henceforward discussed together.
We proceed, therefore, to the Bible-canon of the fourth
century, first in the Greek Church and then in the Latin.
The Council of Laodicea (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 363), at which there was a
predominant semiarian influence, forbad the reading of all
<emph>non-canonical</emph> books. The 59th canon enacts, that <q>private
psalms must not be read in the Church, nor uncanonized
books; but only the canonical ones of the New and Old
Testament.</q> The 60th canon proceeds to give a list of
such. All the books of the Old Testament are enumerated,
but in a peculiar order, somewhat like the Septuagint one.
With Jeremiah is specified <hi rend='italic'>Baruch</hi>, then the Lamentations
and <hi rend='italic'>Epistle</hi>. The prophets are last; first the minor, next
the major and Daniel. In the New Testament list are the
usual seven Catholic epistles, and fourteen of Paul, including
that to the Hebrews. The Apocalypse alone is wanting.
Credner has proved that this 60th canon is not original, and
of much later date.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des neutest.
Kanon</hi>, p. 217, &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Apostolic Constitutions give a kind of canon like that
in the 59th of Laodicea. After speaking of the books of
Moses, Joshua, Judges, Kings, Chronicles, those belonging
to the return from the captivity, those of Job, Solomon, the
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
sixteen prophets, and the Psalms of David; our Acts, the
epistles of Paul, and the four gospels are mentioned. It is
remarkable that the Catholic epistles are not given. That
they are indicated under Acts is altogether improbable.
The Antiochian Church of that time doubted or denied the
apostolicity of these letters, as is seen from Theodore, Cosmas,
and others. Hence, their absence from these Constitutions,
which are a collection belonging to different times; the
oldest portion not earlier perhaps than the third century.<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Constit. Apostol.</hi>, p. 67, ed Ueltzen.</note>
</p>

<p>
Cyril of Jerusalem, who took part in the Council of
Laodicea,<note place='foot'>Died 386 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
gives a list <q>of the divine Scriptures.</q> The
books of the Old Testament are twenty-two, and the arrangement
is nearly that which is in the English Bible. With
Jeremiah is associated <q>Baruch and the Epistle.</q> All the
New Testament books are given except the Apocalypse.
The list agrees very nearly with that of Eusebius, by taking
the latter's <q>controverted</q> writings into the class of the
<q>generally received.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Catech.</hi>, iv. 22,
pp. 66, 67, ed. Milles.</note> The writer insists on the necessity
of unity in the Church upon the subject, and forbids the
reading of writings not <emph>generally received</emph>. None but these
are allowed. Yet he refers to Baruch (iii. 36-38) as <emph>the
prophet;</emph><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
xi. p. 142.</note> and in adducing the testimonies of the prophets
for the existence of the Holy Spirit, the last he gives is Daniel xiii. 41, 45.
Sirach iii. 21, 22 is cited;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
vi. p. 80.</note> Wisdom is
quoted as Solomon's (xiii. 5);<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
ix. pp. 115, 122.</note> the song of the three children
is used (verse 55)<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
ix. p. 115.</note> with verses 27, 29;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
ii. p. 31.</note> and Daniel
(xiii. 22, 45) is quoted.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
xvi. p. 239.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Athanasius's festal epistle (365 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) the archbishop
undertakes <q>to set forth in order, the books that are canonical
and handed down and believed to be divine.</q> His list
of the Old Testament nearly agrees with Cyril's, except
that Esther is omitted and Ruth counted separately, to
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
make out the twenty-two books. He adds, <q>there are other
books not canonical, designed by the fathers to be read by
those just joining us and wishing to be instructed in the
doctrine of piety;</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Wisdom of Solomon and the
Wisdom of Sirach, and Esther and Judith and Tobit, and
the Doctrine of the Apostles so called, and the Shepherd;
<q>those being <emph>canonical</emph>, and these being <emph>read</emph>, let there be
no mention of apocryphal writings,</q> &amp;c. The New Testament list is the same
as Cyril's, with the addition of the Apocalypse.<note place='foot'>Athanasii
<hi rend='italic'>Opp.</hi> ed. Benedict. i. 2, pp. 962, 963.</note>
He quotes several of the apocryphal books in the
same way as he does the canonical. Thus he introduces Judith (viii. 16)
with <q>the Scripture said;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Orat. contra
Arianos</hi>, ii. 35, vol. i. 503, ed. Benedict.</note> and Baruch (iii. 12)
is cited as if it were Scripture.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
ii. 42, i. p. 510.</note> Wisdom (vi. 26)
has the epithet Scripture applied to it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
ii. 79, i. p. 546.</note> Sirach (xv. 9) is introduced with
<q>what is said by the Holy Spirit.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epist. ad
episcop. Ægypt.</hi>, &amp;c., i. 1, p. 272.</note> Baruch
(iv. 20, 22) and Daniel (xiii. 42) are referred to in the same
way as Isaiah.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra Arian.</hi>, i. 12, i.
p. 416.</note> Tobit (ii. 7) has <q>it is written</q> prefixed
to it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Apolog. contra Arianos</hi>,
ii. vol. i. p. 133.</note> Canonical and apocryphal are mentioned together;
and similar language applied to them.
</p>

<p>
Eusebius of Caesarea cites Wisdom as a <emph>divine
oracle</emph>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Praepar Evan.</hi>, i. 9.</note>
and after adducing several passages from Proverbs, subjoining
to them others from the same book with the introductory
formula <q>these are also said to be the same writers,</q> he concludes with
<q>such is the scripture.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
xi. 14.</note> Sirach is cited as Solomon's along with
various passages from Proverbs.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
xii. 18.</note> After quoting Baruch, he says, <q>there is no need to appeal
to the divine voices, which clearly confirm our
proposition.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, vi. 11.</note>
The additions to Daniel are also treated as
Scripture.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Demon. Evang.</hi>, vi. 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
Basil of Caesarea<note place='foot'>Died 379 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
had a canon agreeing with that of
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
Athanasius. Along with the usual books reckoned as belonging
to the canon, he used the apocryphal productions of the Old
Testament. Thus the book of Wisdom (i. 4)<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Homil.
in princip. proverb. Opp.</hi> ed. Garnier altera, vol. ii. p. 140.</note> is
quoted by him. So are Sirach (xx. 2);<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Constitutiones
Monast.</hi>, c. iii. 2. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, p. 779.</note> Baruch,
(iii. 36)<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adv. Eunom</hi>, vol. i. p. 417.</note>
called Jeremiah's; Judith (ix. 4);<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Spiritu
Sancto</hi>, c. viii. vol. iii. p. 23.</note> and Daniel (xiii.
50).<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Princip. Proverb</hi>, vol. ii.
p. 152.</note>
</p>

<p>
Gregory of Nazianzus<note place='foot'>Died 389
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> puts his list into a poetical form.
In the Old Testament it agrees with Athanasius's exactly,
except that he mentions none but the canonical books.
Like Athanasius, he omits Esther. In the New Testament
he deviates from Athanasius, by leaving out the Apocalypse,
which he puts among the spurious.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Opp.</hi> ed.
Migne, vol. iii. pp. 473, 474.</note> He does not ignore
the apocryphal books of the Old Testament, but quotes
Daniel xiii. 5.<note place='foot'>Gregorii Nazianzeni, <hi rend='italic'>Opp.</hi>
ed. Migne, vol. iii. pp. 473, 474.</note>
</p>

<p>
Amphilochius of Iconium<note place='foot'>Died 395
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> gives a metrical catalogue of
the Biblical books. The canon of the Old Testament is the
usual one, except that he says of Esther at the end, <q>some
judge that Esther should be added to the foregoing.</q> He
notices none of the apocryphal books. His New Testament
canon agrees with the present, only he excludes the Apocalypse
as <emph>spurious</emph>; which is given as the judgment of the
majority. He alludes to the doubts that existed as to the
epistle to the Hebrews, but regards it as Pauline; and to
the number of the catholic epistles (seven or three).<note place='foot'>Iambi ad
Seleucum; in Greg. Naz. <hi rend='italic'>Opp.</hi> ii. p. 194.</note> The
concluding words show that no list was universally received
at that time.
</p>

<p>
Epiphanius<note place='foot'>Died 403 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
follows Athanasius in his canon. As to
the number of the Old Testament books, he hesitates between
twenty-two and twenty-seven; but the contents are
the same. At the end of the twenty-seven books of the
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
New Testament, Wisdom and Sirach are mentioned as <q>divine writings;</q>
elsewhere they are characterized as <q>doubtful.</q><note place='foot'>ἀμφιλέκτα.
<hi rend='italic'>Adv. Hæres</hi>, i. p. 19. See <hi rend='italic'>Hæres</hi>, iii.
tom. i. p. 941. De ponder. et mensur. 23.</note>
His practice shows his sentiments clearly enough,
when Sirach (vii. 1) is introduced with <q>the Scripture</q>
testifies<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Advers. Hæres</hi>, lib. i.,
tom. 2 ed. Petav. Paris, 1662, p. 72.</note>; vii. 9 is elsewhere
quoted<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, lib. ii. tom. ii. p. 781.</note>;
Wisdom (i. 4) is cited as Solomon's;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
lib. ii. tom. i. p. 580.</note> Baruch (iii. 36) is introduced with,
<q>as the Scripture says,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, lib, ii.
tom. i. p. 481.</note> and Daniel (xiii. 42) is quoted
with, <q>as it is written.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, lib. i.
tom. ii. p. 157.</note> He mentions the fact that the epistles of Clement
of Rome were read in the churches.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hæres</hi>,
xxx. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
Didymus of Alexandria<note place='foot'>Died 392 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
speaks against 2 Peter that it is
not in the canons.<note place='foot'>Enarrat. in ep. S. Petri secundam,
p. 1774 ed Migne.</note>
</p>

<p>
Chrysostom<note place='foot'>Died  407 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
does not speak of the canon; but in the
New Testament he never quotes the last four catholic epistles
or the Apocalypse. All the other parts he uses throughout
his numerous works,<note place='foot'>See Montfaucon in
his edition of Chrysostom's Works, vol. vi. pp.
364, 365, ed. Paris, 1835.</note> including the Apocrypha. Thus
he introduces Wisdom (xvi. 28) with <q>Scripture says.</q><note place='foot'>Expos.
in Psalm cix. 7. See also xi. 1 in Genes, where Wisdom
xiv. 3 is cited.</note> He quotes Baruch (iii. 36, 38);<note place='foot'>Expos.
in Psalm xlix. 3.</note> and Sirach (iv. 1.).<note place='foot'>De Lazaro, ii. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
Didymus of Alexandria<note place='foot'>Died 392 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
cites Baruch (iii. 35) as Jeremiah,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Trinitate</hi>, iii. 2. p. 792 ed. Migne.</note>
and treats it like the Psalms.<note place='foot'>Fragmenta in Epist. 2 ad
Corinthios, when Baruch, iii. 3, is quoted
like Psalm 101, p. 1697.</note> Daniel (xiii. 45) is
also quoted.<note place='foot'>De Spirit. sanct. i. p. 1033.</note>
He says of Peter's Second Epistle that it is
not in the canon.
</p>

<p>
Theodore of Mopsuestia<note place='foot'>Died 428 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
was much freer than his contemporaries
in dealing with the books of Scripture. It
seems that he rejected Job, Canticles, Chronicles, and the
Psalm-inscriptions; in the New Testament the epistle of
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
James, and others of the catholic ones. But Leontius's account
of his opinions cannot be adopted without suspicion.<note place='foot'>See Leontius
Byzantinus contra Nestorianos et Eutychianos, lib.
iii. in <hi rend='italic'>Gallandi Bibliotheca</hi>, xii. p.
690. Comp. Fritzsche <hi rend='italic'>De Theodori
Mopsuesteni vita et scriptis</hi>, Halæ, 1836.</note>
</p>

<p>
The canon of Cyril of Alexandria<note place='foot'>Died 444
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> does not differ from
Athanasius's. Like other writers of the Greek Church in
his day he uses along with the canonical the apocryphal
books of the Old Testament. He quotes 1 (iii.) Esdras (iv.
36) with <q>inspired Scripture says.</q><note place='foot'>Contra Julian, i.
p. 541, ed. Migne.</note> Wisdom (vii. 6) is introduced with, <q>according
to that which is written.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
p. 815.</note> In another place it has the prefix <q>for it is written</q>
(i. 7);<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, p. 921.</note>
and is treated as Scripture (ii. 12).<note place='foot'>In Isaim, ed. Migne,
p. 93.</note> Sirach (i. 1) is cited.<note place='foot'>P. 859, vol. i.</note>
Baruch also (iii. 35-37) is introduced with, <q>another of the
holy prophets said.</q><note place='foot'>P. 910, vol. i., ed. Migne.</note>
</p>

<p>
The catalogues of the Old Testament contained in the
manuscripts B, C, and א need not be given, as they are
merely codices of the Septuagint, and have or had the books
canonical and apocryphal belonging to that version. The
list of the New Testament books in B is like that of Athanasius.
Imperfect at the end, the MS. must have had at
first the Epistles to Timothy, Titus, Philemon, and the
Apocalypse. C (cod. Ephraemi rescriptus) has fragments
of the New Testaments, which show that it had originally
all the present books in the same order as Athanasius's.
א or the Sinaitic manuscript has the Epistle of Barnabas
and the Shepherd of Hermas, in addition to the New
Testament.
</p>

<p>
The progress made by the Greek Church of the fourth
and former part of the fifth century, in its conception of
the canon seems to be, that the idea of ecclesiastical settlement,
or public, legal, definitive establishment was attached
to the original one. A writing was considered canonical
when a well-attested tradition put it among those composed
by inspired men, apostles or others; and it had on that
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
account a determining authority in matters of faith. Books
which served as a rule of faith and were definitively set
forth by the Church as divinely authoritative, were now
termed <emph>canonical</emph>. The canon consisted of writings settled
or determined by ecclesiastical law.<note place='foot'>βιβλία κανονιζόμενα,
κανονικά, κεκανονισμένα, ὡρισμένα.</note> Such was the idea
added to the original acceptation of canon. To canonical
were opposed apocryphal writings, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
<emph>heretical</emph> and <emph>fabricated</emph>
ones; while an intermediate class consisted of those
read in the churches, which were useful, but not decisive in
matters of belief. Another advance in the matter of the
canon at this period was the general adoption of the Hebrew
canon, with a relegation of the Greek additions in the Septuagint
to the class <emph>publicly read</emph>.<note place='foot'>βιβλία
ἀναγινωσκόμενα.</note> Yet doubts about the
reception of Esther into the number of the canonical books
were still entertained, though it was one of the Jewish
canon; doubtless on account of its want of harmony with
Christian consciousness. And the catholic epistles which
had been doubted before, Jude, James, Second Peter, were
now generally received. But there was a division of opinion
about the Apocalypse.
</p>

<p>
We come to the period of the Latin, corresponding to that
of the Greek Church which has just been noticed. Augustine<note place='foot'>Died
430 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
gave great attention to the subject, laboring to establish
a complete canon, the necessity of which was generally
felt. According to him the Scriptures which were received
and acknowledged by all the churches of the day should be
canonical. Of those not universally adopted, such as are
received by the majority and the weightier of the churches
should be preferred to those received by the fewer and less
important churches. In his enumeration of the forty-four
books of the Old Testament, he gives, after Chronicles,
other histories <q>which are neither connected with the order</q>
specified in the preceding context, <q>nor with one another,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Job, Tobit, Esther, Judith, the two books of the Maccabees,
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
and Esdras. Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, he thinks,
should be numbered among the prophets, as deserving of
authority and having a certain likeness to Solomon's writings.<note place='foot'>The
forty-four books are, 5 of Moses, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 4
Kings, 2 Chronicles, Job, Tobit, Esther, Judith, 2 Maccabees, Ezra,
Nehemiah, Psalms, 3 of Solomon, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, 12 Prophets,
4 greater do. <hi rend='italic'>De Doctrina Christiana</hi> ii. 8.</note>
He says of the Maccabees that this <q>Scripture has
been received by the Church not uselessly, if it be read or
heard soberly.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra Gaudent.</hi>
i. 38. <hi rend='italic'>Opp.</hi> Paris, 1837, vol. ix. p. 1006.</note>
The famous passage in the treatise on
Christian doctrine, where he enumerates the whole canon,
is qualified by no other; for though he knew the distinction
between the canonical books of the Palestinian Jews and
the so-called apocryphal ones, as well as the fact of some
New Testament writings not being received universally, he
thought <emph>church-reception</emph> a sufficient warrant for canonical
authority. Hence, he considered the books of the Maccabees
canonical, because so received by the Church; while
he says of Wisdom and Sirach that they merited <emph>authoritative</emph>
reception and numbering among the <emph>prophetic</emph>
Scriptures.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Doctr. Christ.</hi> ii.
8. <hi rend='italic'>Civitat. Dei.</hi> xviii. 20, 1.</note>
Of the former in particular he speaks strongly in one place,
asserting that it is worthy to be venerated by all Christians
as of divine authority.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Praesdest.
Sanct.</hi> i. 11.</note> But he afterwards retracted his opinion of
the canonical authority of Sirach.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Retractt.</hi>
i. 10.</note> He raises,
not lowers, the authority of the so-called apocryphal books
which he mentions. He enumerates all the New Testament
books, specifying the Pauline epistles as fourteen, and so
reckoning that to the Hebrews as the apostle's; but he
speaks of it elsewhere as an epistle about which some were
uncertain, professing that he was influenced to admit it as canonical by the
authority of the Oriental churches.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Peccat.
merit.</hi> i. 50; <hi rend='italic'>Opp.</hi> vol. x. p. 137, ed. Migne.</note> In
various places he speaks hesitatingly about its Pauline
authorship.
</p>

<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<p>
In 393, the African bishops held a council at Hippo where
the canon was discussed. The list of the canonical Scripture
given includes, besides the Palestinian one, Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus, Tobit, Judith, and the two books of Maccabees.
The New Testament canon seems to have agreed exactly with our
present one.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Mansi</hi>,
tom. iii. p. 924.</note> The Council of Carthage
(397) repeated the statute of its predecessor, enumerating
the same books of the Bible as canonical.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
p. 891.</note> Augustine was
the animating spirit of both councils, so that they may be
taken as expressing his views on the subject.
</p>

<p>
Jerome<note place='foot'>Died 420 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
gives a list of the twenty-two canonical books of
the Old Testament, the same as that of the Palestinian Jews,
remarking that some put Ruth and Lamentations among
the Hagiographa, so making twenty-four books. All besides
should be put among the Apocrypha. Wisdom, Sirach,
Judith, Tobit, the Shepherd are not in the canon. The two books of Maccabees
he regarded in the same light.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prologus
galeatus in Libros Regum. Epist. ad Paulinum.</hi></note> But
though Jerome's words imply the apocryphal position of
these extra-canonical books, he allows of their being read in
public for the edification of the people, not to confirm the
authority of doctrines; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, they belong to <q>the ecclesiastical
books</q> of Athanasius. His idea of <q>apocryphal</q> is
wider and milder than that of some others in the Latin
Church. It has been conjectured by Welte,<note place='foot'>In Herbst's
<hi rend='italic'>Einleit.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>erster Theil</hi>, p. 37.</note>
that the conclusions
of the African councils in 393 and 397 influenced
Jerome's views of the canon, so that his later writings allude
to the apocryphal works in a more favorable manner than
that of the <hi rend='italic'>Prologus galeatus</hi> or the preface to Solomon's
books. One thing is clear, that he quotes different passages
from the Apocrypha along with others from the Hebrew
canon. In his letter to Eustochius, Sirach iii. 33 (Latin)
comes between citations from Matthew and Luke; and is introduced
by <emph>which is written</emph>, in a letter to Pammachius; and
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
xxii. 6 has <emph>divine Scripture</emph> applied to
it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Opp.</hi> ed. Benedict., Vol. IV., pp.
679, 684, 750.</note> Ruth, Esther,
and Judith are spoken of as <emph>holy volumes</emph>. The practice of
Jerome differed from his theory; or rather he became less
positive, and altered his views somewhat with the progress
of time and knowledge. As to the New Testament, he gives
a catalogue of all that now belongs to it, remarking of the
epistle to the Hebrews and of the Apocalypse that he adopts
both on the authority of ancient writers, not of present custom.
His opinion about them was not decided.<note place='foot'>Ep. ad Dardan.
<hi rend='italic'>Opp.</hi> vol. i. P. 1103, ed. Migne.</note> In another
work he gives the Epistle of Barnabas at the end of the
canonical list. He also states the doubts of many respecting
the Epistle to Philemon, and about 2 Peter, Jude, 2 and
3 John. According to him the first Epistle of Clement of
Rome was publicly read in some churches.<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Onomastica Sacra</hi>; Comment. in Ep. ad Philem; De Viris
illustr.</note>
</p>

<p>
Hilary of Poitiers<note place='foot'>Died 368 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
seems to have followed Origen's catalogue.
He gives twenty-two books, specifying <q>the epistle</q>
of Jeremiah; and remarks that some added Tobit and
Judith, making twenty-four, after the letters of the Greek
alphabet. He cites Wisdom and Sirach as <q>prophets.</q><note place='foot'>Prolog.
in Psalm., <hi rend='italic'>Opp.</hi> ed. Migne, vol. i. p. 241.</note>
In the New Testament he never quotes James, Jude, 2 and
3 John, nor 2 Peter. 2 Maccabees (vii. 28) is introduced
with <q>according to the prophet;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Trinitate</hi> iv. 16.</note> Sirach (xxxi. 1) is introduced
with <q>nor do they hear the Lord saying;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ex.
Op. Hist. Fragmentum</hi>, iii. vol. ii. p. 672 ed. Migne.</note>
Wisdom is cited as Solomon's (viii. 2);<note place='foot'>In cxxvii.
Psalm.</note> Judith (xvi. 3) is
cited;<note place='foot'>In Psalm cxxvi. 6.</note>
so is Baruch (iii. 36);<note place='foot'>In Psalm lxviii. 19, and <hi rend='italic'>De
Trinitate</hi>, iv. 42.</note> and Daniel xiii.
42.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, iv. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
Optatus of Mela<note place='foot'>Died about 370
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> has the usual canonical books, but
omits the epistle to the Hebrews. He uses the apocrypha
without scruple, introducing Sirach (iii. 30) with <q>it is
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
written;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Schismate Donatist</hi>,
iii. 3.</note> and Wisdom (i. 13) with <q>it is written in
Solomon.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, ii. 25.</note>
</p>

<p>
Lucifer of Cagliari<note place='foot'>Died about 370
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> uses the apocrypha equally with the
canonical books. Thus 1 Maccabees (i. 43) is quoted as
<q>holy Scripture.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
non parcendo</hi>, &amp;c., ed. Coleti, p. 190.</note>
So is 2 Maccab. (vi. 1).<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
p. 236.</note> Judith (ix. 2) is cited,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
p. 187.</note> as are also Wisdom (xvii. 1, 2);<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Pro
Athanasio</hi>, lib. i. p. 98.</note> Tobit (iv.
6);<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, p. 105.</note> and Daniel (xiii.
20).<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, lib. ii. pp. 127, 128.</note>
</p>

<p>
Ambrose of Milan<note place='foot'>Died 397 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
had the same canon as most of the
Westerns in his time. With some others, he considered the
Epistle to the Hebrews to have been written by St. Paul.
In the Old Testament he used the apocryphal books pretty freely. Wisdom
(vii. 22) is cited as authoritative Scripture.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Spiritu Sancto</hi> iii. 18.</note>
Sirach (xi. 30) is also cited as Scripture.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
bono mortis</hi> viii.</note> Baruch
(iv. 19) is quoted;<note place='foot'>In Psalm cxviii., Sermo. 118,
2.</note> Daniel (xiii. 44, 45) is treated as
Scripture and prophetic;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Spirit.
Sancto.</hi> iii., vi. 39.</note> and Tobit is expounded like any
other book of Scripture.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'> Liber de Tobia</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Rufinus<note place='foot'>Died 410 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
enumerates the books of the Old and New
Testaments which <q>are believed to be inspired by the Holy
Spirit itself, according to the tradition of our ancestors, and
have been handed down by the Churches of Christ.</q> All
the books of the Hebrew canon and of the New Testament
are specified. After the list he says, <q>these are they which
the fathers included in the canon, by which they wished to
establish the assertion of our faith.</q> He adds that there
are other books not <emph>canonical</emph>, but <emph>ecclesiastical</emph>&mdash;the
Wisdom of Solomon, Sirach, Tobit, Judith, and the books of the
Maccabees. Besides the usual New Testament works, he
speaks of the Shepherd of Hermas, and the <q>Judgment of
Peter</q> as read in the churches, but not as authoritative in
matters of faith.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Expos.
in Symbol. Apostol.</hi>, pp. 373, 374, ed. Migne.</note>
</p>

<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>

<p>
Philastrius<note place='foot'>Died about 387
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> of Brescia gives some account of the Scriptures
and their contents in his time. The canonical
Scriptures, which alone should be read in the Catholic
Church, are said to be the law and the prophets, the gospels,
Acts, thirteen epistles of Paul, and seven others, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, two of
Peter, three of John, one of Jude, and one of James. Of
the Old Testament apocrypha he asserts that they ought to
be read for the sake of morals by the perfect, but not by all.
He speaks of <emph>heretics</emph> who reject John's gospel and the
Apocalypse. Respecting the Epistle to the Hebrews which
is omitted in his canon, he speaks at large, but not very
decidedly, affirming that some attributed its authorship to
Barnabas, or Clement of Rome, or Luke. <q>They wish to
read the writings of the blessed apostle, and not rightly
perceiving some things in the epistle, it is not therefore
read by them in the church. Though read by some, it is
not read to the people in the church; nothing but Paul's
thirteen epistles, and that to the Hebrews sometimes.</q><note place='foot'>De
Hæres. chs. 60 and 61, in Galland, vii. pp. 424, 425.</note>
The influence of the East upon the West appears in the
statements of this father upon the subject. He had several
canonical lists before him; one at least from an Oriental-Arian
source, which explains some assertions, particularly
his omission of the Apocalypse.
</p>

<p>
Innocent I. of Rome wrote to Exsuperius (405 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>),
bishop of Toulouse, giving a list of the canonical books.
Besides the Hebrew canon, he has Wisdom and Sirach;
Tobit, Judith, the two Maccabees. The New Testament
list is identical with the present. He also refers to pseudepigraphical
writings which ought not only to be rejected
but condemned.<note place='foot'>Apud Mansi, iii. pp. 1040, 1041.</note>
</p>

<p>
A canonical list appears in three different forms bearing
the names of Damasus (366-384), Gelasius I. (492-496),
and Hormisdas (514-523). According to the first, the books
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
of the Old Testament are arranged in three orders. In the
first are the Pentateuch, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, four Kings,
two Chronicles, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles,
Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus; in the second, all the prophets,
including Baruch; in the third, Job, Tobit, Judith, Esther,
Esdras, two Maccabees. The New Testament books are the
four gospels, fourteen epistles of Paul, the Apocalypse, and
Acts, with seven Catholic epistles.
</p>

<p>
That which is called the Decree of Gelasius is almost
identical with the preceding. It wants Baruch and Lamentations.
It has also two Esdrases instead of one. In the
New Testament the epistle to the Hebrews is absent.
</p>

<p>
The Hormisdas-form has the Lamentations of Jeremiah:
and in the New Testament the Epistle to the Hebrews.
</p>

<p>
The MSS. of these lists present some diversity; and
Credner supposes the Damasus-list a fiction. But Thiel has
vindicated its authenticity. It is possible that some interpolations
may exist in the last two; the first, which is the
shortest, may well belong to the time of Damasus.<note place='foot'>Credner's
<hi rend='italic'>Zur Geschichte des Kanons</hi>, p. 151, &amp;c., and Thiel's
<hi rend='italic'>Epistolæ Romanorum Pontificum genuinae</hi>, tom. i.</note>
</p>

<p>
In 419 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> another council at Carthage, at which Augustine
was present, repeated the former list of books with a
single alteration, viz., fourteen epistles of Paul (instead of
thirteen).<note place='foot'>Mansi iv. p. 430.</note>
</p>

<p>
The preceding notices and catalogues show a general desire
in the Western Church to settle the canon. The two
most influential men of the period were Augustine and
Jerome, who did not entirely agree. Both were unfitted for
a critical examination of the topic. The former was a
gifted spiritual man, lacking learning and independence.
Tradition dominated all his ideas about the difficult or disputed
books. He did not enter upon the question scientifically,
on the basis of certain principles; but was content
to take refuge in authority&mdash;the prevailing authority of
leading churches. His judgment was weak, his sagacity
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
moderate, and his want of many-sidedness hindered a critical
result. Jerome, again, was learned but timid, lacking
the courage to face the question fairly or fundamentally;
and the independence necessary to its right investigation.
Belonging as he did to both churches, he recommended the
practice of the one to the other. He, too, was chiefly influenced
by tradition; by Jewish teachers in respect to the
Old Testament, and by general custom as to the New. The
question was not susceptible of advancement under such
manipulation; nor could it be settled on a legitimate basis.
Compared with the eastern Church, the western accepted a
wider canon of the Old Testament, taking some books into
the class of the <emph>canonical</emph> which the former put among those
<emph>to be read</emph>. In regard to the New Testament, <emph>all</emph> the Catholic
epistles and even the Apocalypse were received. The
African churches and councils generally adopted this larger
canon, because the old Latin version or versions of the
Bible current in Africa were daughters of the Septuagint.
If the Latins apparently looked upon the Greek as the
original itself, the apocryphal books would soon get rank
with the canonical. Yet the more learned fathers, Jerome,
Rufinus and others, favored the Hebrew canon in distinguishing
between <emph>canonical</emph> and <emph>ecclesiastical</emph> books. The
influence of the Eastern upon the Western Church is still
visible, though it could not extinguish the prevailing desire
to include the disputed books. The Greek view was
to receive nothing which had not apparently a good attestation
of divine origin and apostolic authority; the Latin was
to exclude nothing hallowed by descent and proved by
custom. The former Church looked more to the sources of
doctrine; the latter to those of edification. The one desired
to contract those sources, so as not to be too rich; the other
to enlarge the springs of edification, not to be too poor.
Neither had the proper resources for the work, nor a right
perception of the way in which it should be set about; and
therefore they were not fortunate in their conclusions, differing
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
as they did in regard to points which affect the
foundation of a satisfactory solution.
</p>

<p>
Notwithstanding the numerous endeavors both in the
East and West to settle the canon during the 4th and 5th
centuries, it was not finally closed. The doubts of individuals
were still expressed; and succeeding ages testified to
the want of universal agreement respecting several books.
The question, however, was <emph>practically</emph> determined. No
material change occurred again in the absolute rejection or
admission of books. With some fluctuations, the canon
remained very much as it was in the 4th and 5th centuries.
Tradition shaped and established its character. General
usage gave it a permanency which it was not easy to disturb.
No definite principles guided the course of its formation,
or fixed its present state. It was dominated first
and last by circumstances and ideas which philosophy did
not actuate. Its history is mainly objective. Uncritical at
its commencement, it was equally so in the two centuries
which have just been considered.
</p>

<p>
The history of the canon in the Syrian church cannot be
traced with much exactness. The Peshito version had only
the Hebrew canonical books at first; most of the apocryphal
were rendered from the Greek and added in the Nestorian
recension. In the New Testament it wanted four of the
catholic epistles and the Apocalypse. Ephrem (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 378)
uses all the books in our canon, the apocryphal as well as
the canonical. The former are cited by him in the same
way as the latter. Sirach ii. 1 is quoted with <emph>as the Scripture
says</emph>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Opp. Græc.</hi>,
tom. ii. P. 327, ed. Rom. 1746.</note> and Wisdom iv. 7 with <emph>it is
written</emph>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, tom.
i. p. 101.</note> Daniel
xiii. 9, belonging to the Greek additions, is also cited with
<emph>as it is written</emph>.<note place='foot'>Tom. iii. p.
60.</note> It should be observed that the quotations
given are all from Ephrem's Greek, not Syriac, works; and
that suspicions have been raised about the former being
tampered with. The Syrian version of the New Testament
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
made by Polycarp at the request of Philoxenus of Mabug,
had the four catholic epistles wanting in the Peshito. It
had also the two epistles of Clement to the Corinthians, if
we may judge by the Harclean recension, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 616; for a
MS. in the Cambridge University Library contains those
epistles immediately after the Catholic ones, and before
those of St. Paul; so that they are put on an equality
with the canonical writings. The Apocalypse is wanting.
Junilius, (though an African bishop about 550 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), says
that he got his knowledge from a Persian of the name of
Paulus who received his education in the school of Nisibis.
He may, therefore, be considered a witness of the opinions
of the Syrian church at the beginning of the 6th century.
Dividing the biblical books into those of <emph>perfect</emph>, those of
<emph>intermediate</emph>, and those of <emph>no authority</emph>, he makes the first
the canonical; the second, those added to them by many
(plures); the third, all the rest. In the first list he puts
Ecclesiasticus. Among the second he puts 1 and 2 Chronicles,
Job, Ezra and Nehemiah, Judith, Esther, 1 and 2
Maccabees; and in the New Testament, James, 2 Peter,
Jude, 2 and 3 John. He also says that the Apocalypse of
John is much doubted by the Orientals. In the third list
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, books of no authority added by some (quidam) to the
canonical, are put Wisdom and Canticles.<note place='foot'>Galland, xii. p. 79,
&amp;c.</note> The catalogue
is confused, and erroneous at least in one respect, that
Jerome is referred to, as sanctioning the division given of
the Old Testament books; for neither he nor the Jews
agree with it.
</p>

<p>
The canon of the Abyssinian church seems to have had
at first all the books in the Septuagint, canonical and apocryphal
together, little distinction being made between them.
Along with the contents of the Greek Bible there were
Enoch, 4 Esdras, the Ascension of Isaiah, the Jubilees, Asseneth,
&amp;c. That of the New Testament agrees with the
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
present Greek one. At a later period in the Arabic age a
list was made and constituted the legal one for the use of
the church, having been derived from the Jacobite canons
of the apostles. This gives, in the Old Testament, the
Pentateuch, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Judith, Kings, Chronicles,
Ezra and Nehemiah, Esther, Tobit, two books of Maccabees,
Job, Psalms, five books of Solomon, minor and
greater prophets. The Wisdom of Sirach (for teaching
children) and the book of Joseph ben Gorion, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that of
the Maccabees, are external. The New Testament has
four gospels, Acts, seven apostolic epistles, fourteen of
Paul, and the Revelation of John. Later catalogues vary
much, and are often enlarged with the book of Enoch, 4
Esdras, the Apocalypse of Isaiah, &amp;c. The canon of the
Ethiopic church was fluctuating.<note place='foot'>See Dillmann in
Ewald's <hi rend='italic'>Jahrbücher</hi>, v. p. 144, &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<p>
The canon of the Armenians had at first the Palestinian
books of the Old Testament, twenty-two in number, and
the usual New Testament ones, except the Apocalypse. It
was made from the Syriac in the fifth century by Sahak
and Mesrob. The deutero-canonical books and additions
were appended, after the disciples of those two men who
had been sent by them into different places, brought back
authentic copies of the Greek Bible from the patriarch
Maximian, by which the version already made was interpolated
and corrected; as it was subsequently corrected by
others despatched to Alexandria and Athens, who, however,
did not return till their teachers were dead. The MSS. of
this version were afterwards interpolated from the Vulgate;
Oskan himself translating for his edition (which was the
first printed one, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1666), Sirach, 4 Esdras and the
Epistle of Jeremiah from the Latin. The book of Revelation
does not seem to have been translated till the eighth
century. Zohrab's critical edition (1805) has Judith, Tobit,
the three books of Maccabees, Wisdom, and the Epistle of
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
Baruch among the canonical books; and in an appendix,
the fourth book of Esdras, the prayer of Manasseh, the
Epistle of the Corinthians to Paul and his answer, the Rest
(end) of the apostle and evangelist John, the prayer of
Euthalius. Like the edition of Oskan, this has all the
deutero-canonical books, which were derived from the Septuagint,
and incorporated by the first translators with their
original version. Another edition published at St. Petersburgh
(1817), for the use of the Jacobite Church, has the
prayer of Manasses and 4 Esdras after the Apocalypse.
</p>

<p>
The Georgian version consisted of the books and additions
in the Greek translation from which it was made.
The New Testament has the canonical books in the usual
order. Jesus Sirach and two books of the Maccabees (2d
and 3d) were not in the Georgian MS. used by Prince Arcil
for the edition of 1743, but were rendered out of the
Russian. The Moscow Bible printed under the direction
and at the cost of Arcil, Bacchar and Wakuset, is the authorized
edition of the Georgian Christians.
</p>

<p>
The Bible canon of the Eastern church in the middle
ages shows no real advance. Endeavors were made to remove
the uncertainty arising from the existence of numerous
lists; but former decisions and decrees of councils were
repeated instead of a new, independent canon. Here belongs
the catalogue in the Alexandrian MS., of the fifth century,
which is peculiar. After the prophets come Esther, Tobit,
Judith, Ezra and Nehemiah, 4 Maccabees, Psalms, Job,
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, the all-virtuous Wisdom,
the Wisdom of Jesus of Sirach. In the New Testament,
the Apocalypse is followed by two epistles of Clement.
The list was probably made in Egypt. That of Anastasius
Sinaita,<note place='foot'>Died 599 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
patriarch of Antioch, is similar to Nicephorus's
Stichometry, which we shall mention afterwards. Baruch
is among the canonical books; Esther among the antilegomena.
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
The Apocalypse is unnoticed. The 85th of the
Apostolic canons gives a list of the Old and New Testament
books, in which the usual canonical ones of the former are
supplemented by Judith and 3 Maccabees; those of the
latter by the two epistles of Clement, with the Apostolic
constitutions. This catalogue cannot be put earlier than
the fifth or sixth century, and is subject to the suspicion of
having been interpolated. We have also Nicephorus's
<hi rend='italic'>Stichometry</hi> (806-815;)<note place='foot'>See Credner's
<hi rend='italic'>Zur Gesch. des Kanons</hi>, p. 97,
&amp;c.</note> of which we may remark that Baruch
is among the canonical books of the Old Testament; while
the Revelation is put with the Apocalypse of Peter, the
epistle of Barnabas and the Gospel according to the Hebrews,
among the antilegomena of the New Testament. It
is also surprising that the Apocalypse of Peter and the
Gospel according to the Hebrews are not among the Apocrypha,
where Clement's epistles with the productions of
Ignatius, Polycarp, and Hermas appear. The list is probably
older than that of the Antioch patriarch Anastasius
Sinaita. Cosmas Indicopleustes (535) never mentions the
seven Catholic epistles of the New Testament or the Apocalypse.
The Trullan council (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 692) adopts the eighty-five
Apostolic canons, rejecting, however, the Apostolic
Constitutions. Photius, patriarch of Constantinople,<note place='foot'>Died 891
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> follows
the eighty-fifth Apostolical canon of the Trullan
Council.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Nomocanon, Titulus III.</hi>,
cap. 2, vol. iv. pp. 1050, 1051 ed. Migne.</note> But in his
Bibliotheca<note place='foot'>See Codd. 113, 126.</note> he speaks differently
regarding the epistles of Clement, and does not treat them
as canonical. Though the first was thought worthy to be
read in public, the second was rejected as spurious; and his
own opinion was not altogether favorable to them. John
of Damascus;<note place='foot'>Died 754 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
the second Nicene council (787); the Synopsis
divinæ Scripturæ Vet. et Novi Test. (about 1000);
Zonaras (about 1120); Alexius Aristenus (about 1160);
and Nicephorus Callistus (1330), call for no remark.
</p>

<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>

<p>
In the Western church of the Middle Ages, diversity of
opinion respecting certain books continued. Though the
views of Augustine were generally followed, the stricter
ones of Jerome found many adherents. The canon was
fluctuating, and the practice of the churches in regard to it
somewhat lax. Here belong Cassiodorus (about 550); the
list in the Codex Amiatinus (about 550); Isidore of Seville<note place='foot'>Died
636 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
who, after enumerating three classes of Old Testament
books gives a fourth not in the Hebrew canon. Here he
specifies Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Tobit, Judith, 1 and 2
Maccabees, saying that the church of Christ puts them among the divine books,
honors and highly esteems them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Etymolog.</hi>
vi. 1.</note>
There are also the fourth council of Toledo (632); Gregory
the Great<note place='foot'>Died  604 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
Notker Labeo;<note place='foot'>Died 912 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
Ivo (about 1092); Bede;<note place='foot'>Died 735 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
Alcuin;<note place='foot'>Died 804 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
Rabanus Maurus;<note place='foot'>Died 856 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
Hugo de St Victor;<note place='foot'>Died 1141 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
Peter of Clugny;<note place='foot'>Died 1156 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
John of Salisbury;<note place='foot'>Died 1182 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
Thomas Aquinas;<note place='foot'>1270 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> Hugo
de St Cher;<note place='foot'>Died 1263 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
Wycliffe;<note place='foot'>Died 1384 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> Nicolaus
of Lyra,<note place='foot'>Died 1340 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> &amp;c.,
&amp;c. Several of these, as Hugo de St Victor, John of Salisbury,
Hugo de St Cher, and Nicolaus of Lyra, followed Jerome in
separating the canonical and apocryphal books of the Old
Testament.<note place='foot'>See Hody, p. 648, &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Reformers generally returned to the Hebrew canon,
dividing off the additional books of the Septuagint or those
attached to the Vulgate. These they called <emph>apocryphal</emph>,
after Jerome's example. Though considered of no authority
in matters of doctrine, they were pronounced useful and
edifying. The principal reason that weighed with the Reformers
was, that Christ and the apostles testified to none
of the Septuagint additions.
</p>

<p>
Besides the canonical books of the Old Testament, Luther
translated Judith, Wisdom, Tobit, Sirach, Baruch, 1 and 2
Maccabees, the Greek additions to Esther and Daniel, with
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
the Prayer of Manasseh. His judgment respecting several
of these is expressed in the prefaces to them. With regard
to 1 Maccabees, he thinks it almost equal to the other books
of Holy Scripture, and not unworthy to be reckoned among
them. Of Wisdom, he says, he was long in doubt whether
it should be numbered among the canonical books; and of
Sirach that it is a right good book proceeding from a wise
man. But he speaks unfavorably of several other apocryphal
productions, as of Baruch and 2 Maccabees. It is
evident, however, that he considered all he translated of
<emph>some</emph> use to the Christian Church. He thought that the
book of Esther should not belong to the canon.
</p>

<p>
Luther's judgment respecting some of the New Testament
books was freer than most Protestants now are disposed
to approve. He thought the epistle to the Hebrews
was neither Paul's nor an apostle's, but proceeded from an
excellent and learned man who may have been the disciple
of apostles. He did not put it on an equality with the
epistles written by apostles themselves. The Apocalypse
he considered neither apostolic nor prophetic, but put it almost
on the same level with the 4th book of Esdras, which
he spoke elsewhere of tossing into the Elbe. This judgment
was afterwards modified, not retracted. James's epistle
he pronounced unapostolic, <q>a right strawy epistle.</q>
In like manner, he did not believe that Jude's epistle proceeded
from an apostle. Considering it to have been taken
from 2 Peter, and not well extracted either, he put it lower
than the supposed original. The Reformer, as also his
successors, made a distinction between the books of the
New Testament similar to that of the Old; the <emph>generally
received</emph> (homologoumena) and <emph>controverted</emph> books (antilegomena);
but the Calvinists afterwards obliterated it, as
the Roman Catholics at the Council of Trent did with the
old Testament.<note place='foot'>Chemnitz calls seven
books of the New Testament <foreign rend='italic'>apocryphos</foreign>, because
of their uncertain authorship (see <hi rend='italic'>Examen Concilii Tridentini</hi>,
p. 45, &amp;c.)</note> The epistle to the Hebrews, those of Jude
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
and James, with the Apocalypse, belong to the latter class.
The distinction in question proceeded from genuine critical
tact on the part of the early Lutheran Church which had
canonical and deutero-canonical writings even in the New
Testament collection. Nor did the Reformers consider it a
dangerous thing to bring the fact before the people. To
make it palpable, Luther attached continuous numbers to
the first twenty-three books of his version, bringing the
four antilegomena after these, without numbers; and this
mode of marking the difference continued till the middle of
the 17th century.<note place='foot'>See Tholuck's
<hi rend='italic'>Kommentar zum Briefe an die Hebräer, zweite
Auflage</hi>, pp. 55, 86.</note> Luther was right in assigning a greater
or less value to the separate writings of the New Testament,
and in leaving every one to do the same. He relied on
their internal value more than tradition; taking the <emph>word
of God</emph> in a deeper and wider sense than its coincidence
with the Bible.
</p>

<p>
Bodenstein of Carlstad examined the question of canonicity
more thoroughly than any of his contemporaries, and
followed out the principle of private judgment in regard to
it. He divides the biblical books into three classes&mdash;1.
Books of the highest dignity, viz., the Pentateuch and
the Gospels; 2. Books of the second dignity, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the works
termed prophetic by the Jews, and the fifteen epistles
universally received; 3. Books of the third and lowest authority,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Jewish Hagiographa and the seven Antilegomena
epistles of the New Testament. Among the
Apocrypha he makes two classes&mdash;such as are out of the
canon to the Hebrews yet hagiographical (Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus,
Judith, Tobit, the two Maccabees), and those that
are clearly apocryphal and to be rejected (third and fourth
Esdras, Baruch, Prayer of Manasseh, a good part of the third
chapter of Daniel, and the last two chapters of Daniel.)<note place='foot'>Carlstadt's
treatise is reprinted in Credner's <hi rend='italic'>Zur Geschichte des
Kanons</hi>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>

<p>
Zwingli asserts that the Apocalypse is not a biblical
book.<note place='foot'>Werke, edited by Schuler and Schulthess, vol. ii. p. 169.</note>
</p>

<p>
Oecolampadius says&mdash;<q>We do not despise Judith, Tobit,
Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, the last two Esdras, the three Maccabees,
the last two chapters of Daniel, but we do not attribute to them
divine authority with those others.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep. ad.
Valdenses</hi>, 1530, <hi rend='italic'>apud. Sculteti annal. evang. renovat decas
secunda</hi>, pp. 313, 314.</note> As
to the books of the New Testament he would not compare
the Apocalypse, James, Jude, 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John
with the rest.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Calvin did not think that Paul was the author of the
epistle to the Hebrews, or that 2 Peter was written by the
apostle himself; but both in his opinion are canonical.
</p>
</div>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. Order Of The New Testament Books.</head>

<p>
I. The arrangement of the various parts comprising the
New Testament was fluctuating in the second century;
less so in the third. In the fourth century the order which
the books had commonly assumed in Greek MSS. and
writers was; the Gospels, the Acts, the Catholic Epistles,
the Pauline, and the Apocalypse. This sequence appears
in the Vatican, Sinaitic, Alexandrian and Ephrem (C)
MSS.; Cyril of Jerusalem, in the 60th Canon of the Laodicean
Council, Athanasius, Leontius of Byzantium, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
II. Another order prevailed in the Latin Church, viz.,
the Gospels, the Acts, the Epistles of Paul, the Catholic
Epistles, and the Apocalypse. This appears in Melito,
Irenæus, Clement of Alexandria, Origen, Augustine, Jerome,
the Vulgate, the Councils of Carthage, held in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
397 and 419; and is now the usual arrangement.
</p>

<p>
Within the limits of the two general arrangements just
mentioned, there were many variations. Thus we find in
relation to <emph>the gospels</emph>.
</p>

<p>
III. (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Matthew, John, Luke, Mark; in the MSS. of
the old Italic marked <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>e</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>ff</hi>, and in
the cod. argenteus of Ulfila's Gothic version.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Matthew, John, Mark, Luke; in the council of Ephesus
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 431, Cyril of Alexandria, Theodoret, the stichometry
of the Clermont MS. Such was the usual order in the
Greek Church of the fifth century.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Mark is put first, followed by Matthew; in the fragment
of a Bobbian MS. of the Itala at Turin marked <hi rend='italic'>k</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Matthew, Mark, John, Luke; in the Curetonian
Syriac gospels. They are mentioned in the same order in
Origen's I. Homily on Luke.
</p>

<p>
The reason of the order in, (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>)
and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) lies in apostleship.
The works of apostles precede those of evangelists.
The established sequence, which is already sanctioned by
Irenæus and Origen, has respect to the supposed dates of
the gospels. Clement of Alexandria says that ancient tradition
supposed those gospels having the genealogies to
have been written before the others.
</p>

<p>
IV. As to the <hi rend='italic'>Acts of the Apostles</hi>, not only is this work
put immediately after the gospels, which is the order in the
Muratorian canon, but we find it in other positions.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Gospels, Pauline Epistles, Acts; in the Sinaitic MS.,
the Peshito,<note place='foot'>Hug says that his copy of
Widmanstad's edition had the Acts immediately
following the Gospels.</note> Jerome,<note place='foot'>Epist. ad Paulinum.</note>
and Epiphanius.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Gospels, Pauline Epistles, Catholic Epistles, Acts;
in Augustine, the third council of Toledo, Isidore, Innocent
I., Eugenius IV., and the Spanish Church generally.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Gospels, Pauline, Catholic Epistles, Apocalypse,
Acts; in the stichometry of the Clermont MS.
</p>

<p>
V. As to <hi rend='italic'>the Epistles of Paul</hi>, besides the place they now
occupy in our Bibles, they sometimes follow the gospels
immediately.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Gospels, Pauline Epistles; the Sinaitic MS., Jerome,
Epiphanius, Augustine, the third council of Toledo, Isidore,
Innocent I., Eugenius IV., the stichometry of the
Clermont MS.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The usual order of the Greek Church is, Gospels,
Acts, Catholic Epistles, Pauline, &amp;c., as in Cyril of Jerusalem,
the Laodicean Council (60), Athanasius, Leontius
of Byzantium, the MSS. A. B., but not א. The critical
Greek Testaments of Lachmann and Tischendorf adopt
this order.
</p>

<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) They are placed last of all in a homily attributed to
Origen, but this does not necessarily show that father's
opinion.<note place='foot'>Hom. vii. in Josua.</note>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) They stand first of all in a Gallican
<hi rend='italic'>Sacramentarium</hi>
cited by Hody.<note place='foot'>De Bibliorum textibus originalibus,
&amp;c., p. 654.</note>
</p>

<p>
VI. With respect to the order of the individual epistles,
the current one has been thought as old as Tertullian and
Clement of Alexandria. But the proof of this is precarious.
It appears in the fourth century, and may have been prior
to that. It is in Epiphanius, who supposes that the arrangement
was the apostle's own. Not only was it the
prevalent one in the Greek Church, but also in the Latin
as we see from the codex Amiatinus, and the Vulgate MSS.
generally. It rests upon the extent of the epistles and the
relative importance of the localities in which the believers
addressed resided.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Marcion had but ten Pauline epistles in the following
order: Galatians, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Romans, 1 and 2
Thessalonians, the Laodiceans, (Ephesians), Colossians,
Philemon, Philippians.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) 1 and 2 Corinthians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians,
Galatians, 1 and 2 Thessalonians, Romans, Philemon,
Titus, 1 and 2 Timothy, to the Laodiceans, the Alexandrians
(the Epistle to the Hebrews); in the Muratorian
canon.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians,
Thessalonians, Colossians, Timothy, Titus, Philemon,
Hebrews; in Augustine, and several MSS. of the
Vulgate in England.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, p. 664.</note>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, Thessalonians,
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Timothy, Titus, Philemon,
Hebrews; in the so-called decree of Gelasius in the
name of Hormisdas, in Labbe's text. But here different
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
MSS. vary in regard to the position of the Thessalonian
epistles.
</p>

<p>
VII. The Laodicean letter was inserted either before the
pastoral epistles, as in several MSS. of the Vulgate in England;
or before the Thessalonian epistles preceding them;
or at the end of the Epistle to the Hebrews, as in a MS. of
the Latin Bible at Lembeth. Its insertion in copies of the
Vulgate was owing to the authority of Gregory the Great,
who looked upon it as authentic.
</p>

<p>
VIII. The position of the Epistle to the Hebrews usually
was either before the pastoral epistles, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, immediately
after those to the Thessalonians; or after the pastoral ones
and Philemon. The former method was generally adopted
in the Greek Church from the fourth century. The latter
prevailed in the Latin Church from Augustine onward.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Pauline epistles to churches (the last being the
second to the Thessalonians), Hebrews, Timothy, Titus,
Philemon; in the MSS. א, A. B. C. H., Athanasius, Epiphanius;
Euthalius,<note place='foot'>See Zacagni's
<hi rend='italic'>Collectanea monumentorum veterum Praefat</hi>, p.
lxxi., &amp;c.</note> Theodoret. Jerome mentions it after the
epistles of Paul to the seven churches as an eighth excluded
by the majority, and proceeds to specify the pastoral ones.
But Amphilochius and Ebedjesu the Syrian have the western
order, viz., the following&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Pauline Epistles, Hebrews (following immediately
that to Philemon); in Augustine and the Vulgate version
generally. It is so in the canons of the councils at Hippo
and Carthage (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 393 and 397), and in the MSS. D. and
G., in Isidore of Spain, and the council of Trent.
</p>

<p>
IX. With respect to the order of the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Epistles</hi>,
which were not <emph>all</emph> adopted into the canon till the end of
the fourth century; Eusebius putting all except 1 John and
1 Peter among the <emph>antilegomena</emph>; while Jerome, and the
council of Carthage (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 397) admit them unreservedly;
the usual order, viz., James, 1 and 2 Peter, John, Jude, prevailed
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
in the Eastern Church. It is in the Peshito or old
Syriac version, Eusebius, Cyril of Jerusalem, Epiphanius,
the 60th of the Laodicean canons, Athanasius, Gregory of
Nazianzus, Amphilochius, the stichometry of Nicephorus,
the MSS. א. A. B. C., and most Greek MS. But the 76th
of the Apostolic canons has Peter, John, James and Jude.
The canon, however, is comparatively late.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Peter, John, Jude, James; in Philastrius of Brescia.
If we may rely on Cassiodorus's account of Augustine, the
African father followed the same arrangement.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Peter, James, Jude, John; in Rufinus.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Peter, John, James, Jude; in the councils of Carthage,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 397, 419, Cassiodorus, and a Gallican Sacramentarium.
The Vulgate and council of Trent follow this
arrangement.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) John, Peter, Jude, James; in the list given by Innocent
I., and the third council of Toledo.
</p>

<p>
The Eastern church naturally set the Epistle of James,
who was Bishop of Jerusalem, at the head of the others;
while the Western put Peter, the Bishop of Rome, in the
same place.
</p>

<p>
X. The Revelation varied little in position.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) In the decree of Galasius, according to its three recensions,
the Revelation follows Paul's epistles, preceding
those of John and the other Catholic ones.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) In D or the Clermont MS. it follows the <emph>Catholic</emph>
epistles, and precedes the Acts; which last is thrown to the
end of all the books, as if it were an appendix to the writings
of the apostles.<note place='foot'>See Volkmar's <hi rend='italic'>Anhang</hi>
to <hi rend='italic'>Crednet's Geschichte des N. T. Kanon</hi>,
p. 341, &amp;c.; and Hody <hi rend='italic'>De Bibliorum textibus originalibus</hi>,
p. 644, &amp;c.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX. Summary Of The Subject.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>)
In relation to the Old Testament, the prevailing tendency
in the Greek Church was to follow the Palestinian
canon. Different lists appeared from time to time in which
the endeavor there to exclude apocryphal, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, spurious
works, was apparent. In addition to the <emph>canonical</emph>, a class
of <emph>ecclesiastical</emph> books was judged fit for reading in the
Church,&mdash;a class intermediate between the canonical and
apocryphal. The distinction between the canonical and
ecclesiastical writings appears in Cyril of Jerusalem, Athanasius,
Epiphanius, &amp;c. The Latin Church showed a
disposition to elevate the ecclesiastical books of the Greek
Church to the rank of the canonical, making the line between
the two indistinct; as we see from the acts of the
councils at Hippo and Carthage, in the end of the fourth
and beginning of the fifth century, where Augustine's, influence
was predominant. But notwithstanding this deviation
from the stricter method of the Greeks, learned men
like Jerome adhered to the Palestinian canon, and even
styled the ecclesiastical books <emph>apocryphal</emph>, transferring the
epithet from one class to another. Hilary and Rufinus also
followed the Greek usage.
</p>

<p>
During the sixth and following centuries, it cannot be
said that the canon of the Greek Church was definitely
closed, notwithstanding the decrees of councils and references
to older authorities. Opinions still varied about
certain books, such as Esther; though the Palestinian list
was commonly followed. During the same period, the enlarged
canon of the Alexandrian Jews, which went far to
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
abolish the distinction between the canonical and deutero-canonical
books, prevailed in the West, at least in practice;
though some followed the shorter one, sanctioned as it had
been by Jerome. As both lists existed, no complete or
final settlement of the question was reached in the Latin
Church. Neither in the East nor in the West was the canon
of the Old Testament really closed; for though the stricter
principle of separation prevailed in theory, it was not
carried out in practice consistently or universally. The
two men most influential about the canon were Jerome and
Augustine; the one representing its Palestinian, the other
its Alexandrian type. After them no legal or commanding
voice fixed either, to the absolute exclusion of its rival.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The charge of Constantine to Eusebius to make out
a list of writings for the use of the Church and its performance
may be considered as that which first put the subject
on a broad and permanent basis. Its consequences were
important. If it cannot be called the completion or close
of the New Testament canon, it determined it largely.
Eusebius made a Greek Bible containing the usual books,
except the Revelation. Though the historian of the church
was not well fitted for the task, being deficient in critical
ability and trammeled by tradition, he doubtless used his
best judgment. Hence, about the year 337, the Constantinian
Church received a Bible which had an influential origin.
No binding authority indeed attached to the list of the
Christian books it presented; but it had weight in the Greek
Church. It did not prevent different opinions, nor deter
individuals from dissent. Thus Athanasius, who disliked
Eusebius and his party, issued a list of the sacred writings
which included the Revelation. The canon of the Laodicean
Council (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 363) agreed with the Constantine one.
</p>

<p>
That variations still existed in the Eastern Church is
shown by the lists which vied with one another in precedence.
The apostolic canons adopted the seven general
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
epistles, while the apostolic constitutions excluded them.
The Alexandrian MS. added to the ordinary books of the
New Testament, Clement's two epistles; and Cosmas Indicopleustes
omitted the general epistles as well as the Apocalypse.
At length the Council of Constantinople, usually
called the <hi rend='italic'>Trullan</hi>
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 692), laid down positions that fixed
the canon for the Greek Church. The endeavor in it was
to attain to a conclusion which should unite East and West.
This council did not enumerate the separate books, but referred
to older authorities, to the eighty-five canons of the
apostles, the decrees of the synods of Laodicea, Ephesus,
Carthage, and others; to Athanasius, Gregory of Nazianzus,
Amphliochius of Iconium, Cyril of Alexandria, Gennadius,
&amp;c. After the fourth century there was a general desire to
fall back on apostolic times, to appeal to the Church, to ascertain
the opinion of synods or assemblies; in a word, to
rely on authority.
</p>

<p>
Less discrepancy and activity were manifested about the
canon in the Western Church. Here the chief doubts were
directed to the epistle to the Hebrews and the seven general
ones. The former was early excluded, and continued to be
so even in the time of Jerome. The latter were adopted
much sooner. The impulse given by Constantine to determine
the books of Scripture re-acted on the West, where
the Church considered it its own privilege. Augustine's
influence contributed much to the settlement of the question.
The synods of Hippo (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 393) and of Carthage
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 397) received the epistle to the Hebrews and the
seven general ones, thus fixing the New Testament canon
as it now is. In 419 the African bishops, in the presence
of a Papal delegate, repeated their former decision. After
the West Goths joined the Catholic Church in the sixth
century, the Romish and Spanish Churches gave prominence
to the fact of accepting both the Apocalypse and the epistle
to the Hebrews. The canon of the West was now virtually
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
closed; the fourth Council of Toledo (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 632) at which
Isidore was present, agreeing with the Augustinian list,
ratified as that list had been by Innocent the First. The
reception of the epistle to the Hebrews was facilitated by the
objections of the Arians and Semiarians; while opposition
to the Priscillianists in Spain strengthened adherence to the
traditional canon. Augustine and the Trullan Council fixed
the number of the New Testament books as they are now.
</p>

<p>
With regard to the Bible canon in general, we see that
councils had weight when they enumerated the sacred
books; that prominent teachers delivered their opinion on
the subject with effect, and that tradition contributed to one
result; but no general council closed the canon once for all,
till that of Trent promulgated its decrees. This body, however,
could only settle the subject for Romanists, since,
while the right of private judgment is exercised, no corporation
can declare some books inspired and others not,
some authoritative in matters of faith, others not, without
presumption. Though the present Bible canon rests upon
the judgment of good and learned men of different times, it
can never be finally or infallibly settled, because the critical
powers of readers differ, and all do not accept church
authority with unhesitating assent.
</p>

<p>
It is the way of men to defer unduly to the opinions expressed
by synods and councils, especially if they be propounded
dogmatically; to acquiesce in their decisions with
facility rather than institute independent inquiry. This is
exemplified in the history of the canon, where the fallibility
of such bodies in determining canonicity is conspicuous.
It is so in the general reception of the book of Esther, while
the old poem, the Song of Songs, was called in question at
the synod of Jamnia; in the omission of the Revelation
from the canonical list by many belonging to the Greek
Church, while the epistles to Timothy and Titus were received
as St. Paul's from the beginning almost universally.
</p>

</div>


<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X. The Canon In The Confession Of Different
Churches.</head>

<p>
The second Helvetic Confession (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1566) speaks of
the apocryphal books of the Old Testament as those
which the ancients wished to be read in the churches, but
not as authoritative in matters of faith.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Niemeyer's
Collectio Confessionum</hi>, p. 468.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Gallic Confession (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1559) makes a distinction
between canonical and other books, the former being the
rule and norm of faith, not only by the consent of the
Church, but much more by the testimony and intrinsic persuasion
of the Spirit, by whose suggestions we are taught
to distinguish them from other ecclesiastical books, which,
though useful, are not of the kind that any article of faith
can be constituted by them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, p. 330.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Belgic Confession (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1561) makes a distinction
between the sacred and apocryphal books. The latter may
be read by the Church, but no doctrine can be derived from
them. In the list of New Testament books given there are
<emph>fourteen</emph> epistles of Paul.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
pp. 361, 362.</note>
</p>

<p>
The canon of the Waldenses must have coincided at first
with that of the Roman Church; for the Dublin MS. containing
the New Testament has attached to it the Book of
Wisdom and the first twenty-three chapters of Sirach; while
the Zurich codex of the New Testament has marginal
references to the Apocrypha; to Judith, Tobit, 4 Esdras,
Wisdom, Sirach, and Susanna. The <hi rend='italic'>Nobla Leyczon</hi> containing
a brief narration of the contents of the Old and New
Testaments confirms this opinion. It opposes, however,
the old law to the new, making them antagonistic. The
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
historical document containing the articles of <q>The Union
of the Valleys,</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1571, separates indeed the canonical
and apocryphal books, purporting to be founded on a Confession
of Faith as old as <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1120; but the latter is
mythical, as appears from a comparison of it with the epistle
which the legates of the Waldensians gave to Œcolampadius.
The articles of that <q>Union</q> are copied from
Morel's account of his transactions with Œcolampadius and
Bucer in 1530. The literature of this people was altered by
Hussite influences and the Reformation; so that though
differing little from the Romanists at first except in ecclesiastical
discipline, they diverged widely afterwards by
adopting the Protestant canon and doctrines.<note place='foot'>See Herzog's
<hi rend='italic'>Die Romanischen Waldenser</hi>, p. 55, &amp;c.; and his
programm <hi rend='italic'>De origine et pristino statu Waldensium</hi>,
&amp;c., pp. 17, 40, 41.</note> Hence, the
Confession issued in 1655 enumerates as Holy Scripture
nothing but the Jewish Palestinian canon, and the usual
books of the New Testament.<note place='foot'>Leger's <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
des Eglises Vaudoises</hi>, vol. i., p. 112, &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<p>
The canon of the Anglican Church (1562), given in the
sixth article of religion, defines holy Scripture to be <q>those
canonical books of the Old and New Testament, of whose
authority was never any doubt in the Church.</q> After giving
the names and number of the canonical books, the article
prefaces the apocryphal ones with, <q>And the other books
(as Hierome saith) the Church doth read for example of
life and instruction of manners; but yet doth it not apply
them to establish any doctrine? Such are these following,</q>
&amp;c., &amp;c. At the end it is stated that <q>all the books of the
New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do receive
and account them canonical.</q> The article is ambiguous.
If the canonical books enumerated are those meant
in the phrase <q>of whose authority was never any doubt in
the Church,</q> the statement is incorrect. If a distinction is
implied between the canonical books and such canonical
ones as have never been doubted in the Church, the meaning
is obscure. In either case the language is not explicit.
</p>

<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>

<p>
The Scottish or Westminster Confession of Faith gives a
list of all the books of the Old and New Testaments as the
Word of God written; adding that those called the apocrypha
are not of divine inspiration, and no part of the canon,&mdash;of
no authority in the Church, nor to be approved or
made use of otherwise than human writings.
</p>

<p>
The Roman Catholic canon was finally determined at the
Council of Trent (1546), which adopted all the books in the
Vulgate as sacred and canonical, without distinction. Third
and fourth Esdras, third Maccabees, and the prayer of
Manasseh were not included; though the first and last appeared
in the original Clementine edition of 1592, but apart
from the canonical books. They are not in the Sixtine
edition of 1590.<note place='foot'>The reason given for
their being added as a separate appendix is
that they are cited by some fathers and found in some Latin
Bibles.</note> A council at Florence in 1441 had set the
example which was followed at Trent. But this stringent
decree did not prevent individual Catholics from making a
distinction between the books, in assuming a first and second
canon or proto-canonical and deutero-canonical books; as
did Sixtis Senensis, B. Lamy, Anton a matre Dei, Jahn,
and others; though it is hardly consistent with orthodox
Catholicism or the view of those who passed the decree.
When the writings are said to be of different authority&mdash;some
more, others less&mdash;the intent of the council is violated.
The Vatican council (1870) confirmed the Tridentine
decree respecting the canon.
</p>

<p>
The Greek Church, after several ineffectual attempts to
uphold the old distinction between the canonical and ecclesiastical
books by Metrophanes Critopulus patriarch of
Alexandria in 1625, and Cyril Lucaris patriarch of Constantinople
(1638 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>),<note place='foot'>Kimmel's
<hi rend='italic'>Monumenta fidei eccles. orient</hi>, part i.
p. 467.</note> came to the same decision with the
Romish, and canonized all the apocrypha. This was done
at a Jerusalem synod under Dositheus in 1672.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI. The Canon From Semler To The Present Time,
With Reflections On Its Readjustment.</head>

<p>
Semler<note place='foot'>Died 791 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
was the most conspicuous scholar after the
Reformation who undertook to correct the prevailing
ideas respecting the canon. Acquainted with the works of
Toland and Morgan, he adopted some of their views, and
prosecuted his inquiries on their lines chiefly in relation to
the New Testament. He had no definite principles to guide
him, but judged books chiefly by their christian value and
use to the Church. Though his views are sometimes one-sided
and his essays ill-digested, he placed the subject in
new lights, and rendered a service to truth which bore
abundant fruit in after years.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Abhandlung
von freier Untersuchung des
Canons</hi>, 4 parts, Halle, 1771-1775.</note> He dealt tradition severe
blows, and freed theology from the yoke of the letter. He
was followed by his disciple Corrodi, by G. L. Oeder, J. D.
Michaelis, Herder, Lessing, and Eichhorn,&mdash;most of whom
recommended their views by a freshness of style which
Semler did not command. The more recent works of Gesenius,
De Wette, Zunz, Ewald, Hitzig, Geiger and Herzfeld
have contributed to form a juster opinion of the true position
which the books of the Bible occupy.
</p>

<p>
In the New Testament, the writings of F. C. Baur have
opened up a new method of investigating the canon, which
promises important and lasting results. Proceeding in the
track of Semler, he prosecuted his researches into primitive
Christianity with great acuteness and singular power of
combination. Though his separation of Petrine and Pauline
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
christianity is not new, he has applied it in ways which
neither Toland nor Morgan was competent to manage.
These writers perceived the difference between the leading
principle of the twelve and that of Paul, they had some far-seeing
glimpses of the origin and differences of the New
Testament writings,<note place='foot'>See Toland's <hi rend='italic'>Nazarenus</hi>,
p. 25, &amp;c., second edition; and Morgan's <hi rend='italic'>Moral
Philosopher</hi>, vol. i. p. 56, &amp;c.</note> but they propounded them in an
unsystematic way along with untenable conjectures. It was
reserved for the Tübingen professor to elaborate the hypothesis
of an Ebionite or primitive christianity in contra-distinction
from a Pauline, applying it to the origin and
constitution of christian literature; in a word, to use a
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>tendenz-kritik</foreign>
for opening up the genius of the sacred
writings as well as the stages of early christianity out of
which they arose. The head of the Tübingen school, it is
true, has carried out the antagonism between the Petrine
and Pauline christians too rigorously, and invaded the
authenticity of the sacred writings to excess; for it is hazardous
to make a theory extremely stringent to the comparative
neglect of modifying circumstances, which, though
increasing the difficulty of criticism, contribute to the
security of its processes. Yet he has properly emphasized
internal evidence; and many of his conclusions about the
books will stand. He has thrown much light on the original
relations of parties immediately after the origin of
Christianity, and disturbed an organic unity of the New
Testament which had been merely <emph>assumed</emph> by traditionalists.
The best Introductions to the New Testament must accept
them to some extent. The chief characteristic of the school
is the application of historic criticism to the genesis of the
New Testament writings, irrespective of tradition&mdash;a striving
to discover the circumstances or tendencies out of which
the books originated. Baur's
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>tendenz</foreign>-principle judiciously
applied cannot but produce good results.
</p>

<p>
We have seen that sound critical considerations did not
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
regulate the formation of the three collections which made
up the entire canon of the Old Testament. Had it been so,
the Pentateuch would not have been attributed to Moses.
Neither would a number of latter prophecies have been accepted
as Isaiah's and incorporated with the prophet's
authentic productions. All the Proverbs, the book of Ecclesiastes,
and the Song of Songs would not have been
assigned to Solomon; Jonah would have been separated
from the prophets, and Daniel must have had a later position
in the Hagiographa. We cannot, therefore, credit the
collectors or editors of the books with great critical sagacity.
But they did their best in the circumstances, preserving invaluable
records of the Hebrew people. In like manner, it
has appeared, that the ecclesiastics to whom we owe the
New Testament collection were not sharp-sighted in the
literature with which they had to do. It is true that well-founded
doubts were entertained by the early Christians
about several portions, such as the second Epistle of Peter,
the Epistle to the Hebrews, &amp;c., but the Revelation was
needlessly discredited. They accepted without hesitation
the pastoral epistles as Pauline, but doubted some of the
Catholic Epistles, which bear the impress of authenticity
more strongly, such as James. It is therefore incorrect to
say that 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John, James, Jude, Epistle to the
Hebrews, and the Apocalypse <q>have been received into the
canon on evidence less complete</q> than that belonging to
the others. The very general admission of the fourth gospel
as the apostle John's, is a curious example of facile
traditionalism. Biblical criticism, however, scarcely existed
in the first three centuries. It is for us to set the subject in
another light, because our means of judging are superior.
If the resources of the early fathers were inadequate to
the proper sifting of a copious literature, they should be
mildly judged.
</p>

<p>
The question of the canon is not settled. It is probably
the work of successive inquirers to set it on a right basis,
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
and adjust the various parts in a manner consistent with
historic criticism, sound reason, and religion. The absolute
and relative worth of books; the degrees in which they
regulate ethics and conduct; their varying values at the
times of their first appearance and our own; their places in
the general history of human progress&mdash;all these must be
determined before the documents of Judaism and Christianity
be classified aright. Their present arrangement is
external. Based on no interior principle, it furnishes little
help toward a thorough investigation of the whole. Those
who look upon the question as historical and literary take
a one-sided view. It has a theological character also. It
needs the application, not only of historic criticism, but the
immediate consciousness belonging to every Christian. The
two Testaments should be separated, and their respective
positions assigned to each&mdash;the Old having been preparatory
to the New. Should it be said bluntly, as it is in the 7th
Article of the Anglican Church, that the Old is not contrary
to the New Testament? Luther at least expressed his
opinion of the difference between them pretty clearly;<note place='foot'>For example,
<q>Moses is dead; his rule went out when Christ came&mdash;he
is of no further service here.... We are willing to regard
him as a teacher, but we will not regard him as our lawgiver, <emph>unless
he agree with the New Testament and the law of nature</emph>.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Sämmtliche Schriften</hi>, ed. Walch. dritter Theil., pp. 7, 8.</note>
though the theologians of Germany after him evinced a desire
to minimise the difference.<note place='foot'>Such as Calovius,
Chemnitz, John Gerhard, W. Lyser, Quenstedt,
Brochmand, Hollaz, &amp;c. Melancthon also makes no important distinction
between the two Testaments in his <hi rend='italic'>Loci theologici</hi>. Calvin's
theology was derived from the Old Testament more than the New.</note> Should the general
opinion of the Protestant Church that the authority of the Old
Testament is not subordinate to that of the New, be rigidly
upheld? According to one aspect of the former it may be
so, viz., its prophetic and theological aspect, that in which
it is brought into close union with the latter; the essence
of the one being foreshadowed or implied in the other, as
Justin Martyr supposed. And this view has never lost
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
supporters, who by the help of double senses, types, and
symbols, with assumed prediction of the definite and distant
future, transform the old dispensation into an outline picture
of the new; taking into it a body of divinity which is alien
from its nature. According to another aspect, viz., the
moral and historical, the equality can scarcely be allowed.
Schleiermacher is right in saying that the Old Testament
seems to be nothing but a superfluous authority for doctrine;
an opinion coinciding with that of the early Socinians, who
held that it has a historical, not a dogmatic, value. Only
such of our pious emotions as are of a general nature are
accurately reflected in the Old Testament; and all that is
most decidedly Jewish is of least value to christians. The
alleged coincidence of the Old Testament with the New
must be modified by the doctrine of development. It has
been fostered by types and prophecies supposed to refer to
christian times; by the assumed <emph>dictation</emph> of all Scripture by
the Holy Spirit; by fancied references of the one dispensation
to the other; by the confounding of a Jewish Messiah
sketched in various prophets, with Jesus Christ, as if the
latter had not changed, exalted and purified the Messianic
idea to suit his sublime purposes of human regeneration.
The times and circumstances in which the Old Testament
Scriptures appeared, the manners, usages, civilization, intellectual
and moral stage of the Semitic race combine to
give them a lower position than that of the New Testament
books which arose out of a more developed perception
of the relations between God and men. Spiritual apprehension
had got beyond Jewish particularism, especially
in the case of the apostle Paul, who gave the new religion
a distinct vitality by severing it from its Jewish
predecessor.
</p>

<p>
The agreement of the New Testament books with themselves
must be modified by the same doctrine of development.
Jewish and Pauline christianity appear in different works,
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
necessarily imparting a difference of views and expression;
or they are blended in various degrees, as in the epistles to
the Hebrews and the first of Peter. Hence, absolute harmony
cannot be looked for. If the standpoints of the writers
were so diverse, how can their productions coincide? The
alleged coincidence can only be intersected with varieties
proportioned to the measures in which the authors possessed
the Spirit of God. These varieties affect the matter as well
as the manner of the writings. It is therefore unphilosophical
to treat the Bible as a whole which was dictated
by the Spirit and directed to one end. Its uniformity is
chequered with variety; its harmony with disagreement.
It is a bundle of books; a selection from a wider literature,
reflecting many diversities of religious apprehension. After
the two Testaments have been rightly estimated according
to their respective merits, the contents of each should be
duly apportioned&mdash;internal evidence being the test of their
relative importance, irrespective of <hi rend='italic'>a priori</hi> assumptions.
Their traditional origin and authority must be subordinated
to the inherent value they bear, or the conformity of the
ideas to the will of God. The gradual formation of both
canons suggests an analysis of the classes into which they
came to be put; for the same canonical dignity was not attributed
by the Jews to the books contained in the three
divisions; and the controverted writings of the New Testament
found gradual recognition very slowly. Luther made
important distinctions between the canonical books;<note place='foot'>His full
sayings are collected in Bretschneider's <hi rend='italic'>Luther an unsere
Zeit</hi>, pp. 186-224; and in Krause's <hi rend='italic'>Opuscula theologica</hi>,
pp. 205-241.</note> and
Carlstadt put the Antilegomena of the New Testament on
a par with the Hagiographa of the Old.
</p>

<p>
In the Old Testament the three classes or canons have
been generally estimated by the Jews according to their respective
antiquity; though the sacrificial worship enjoined
in the Pentateuch never formed an essential part of the
Jewish religion; the best prophets having set small value
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
upon it. The pure monotheistic doctrine of these last writers,
chiefly contained in the second canon, lifts that class up
to the highest rank; yet the Decalogue in the Pentateuch
is sufficient to stamp the first canon with great worth. It
must be confessed, however, that the Mosaic law was meagre,
in the domain of pure ethics; and that it promoted
among the people a slavish spirit of positivism by laying
more stress on acts than dispositions, and insisting on small
regulations. For this reason, the prophets combated its
narrow externality. The three canons were regarded with
a degree of veneration corresponding to the order in which
they stand. To apportion their respective values to the
individual parts of them is a difficult task.
</p>

<p>
As to the New Testament writings, we think that some
of them might conveniently occupy the position of <emph>deutero-canonical</emph>,
equivalent to those of the Old Testament having
that title. We allude to 2 and 3 John, Jude, James, 2 Peter,
the Revelation. It is true that a few of these were prior in
time to some of the universally-received gospels or epistles;
but time is not an important factor in a good classification.
Among the Pauline epistles themselves, classification might
be adopted; for the pastoral letters are undoubtedly post-Pauline,
and inferior to the authentic ones. In classifying
the New Testament writings, three things might be considered&mdash;the
reception they met with from the first, their
authenticity, above all, their internal excellence. The
subject is not easy, because critics are not universally
agreed about the proper rank and authenticity of a few
documents. The Epistle to the Colossians, for example,
creates perplexity; that to the Ephesians is less embarrassing,
its post-Pauline origin being tolerably clear.
</p>

<p>
What is wanted is a rational historic criticism to moderate
the theological hypothesis with which the older Protestants
set out, the supernatural inspiration of the books, their internal
inseparability, and their direct reference to the work
of salvation. It must be allowed that many points are independent
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
of dogmatics; and that the right decision in things
historical may be reached apart from any ecclesiastical
standpoint.
</p>

<p>
Again, should the distinction between the apocryphal and
canonical books of the Old Testament be emphasized as it
is by many? Should a sharp line be put between the two,
as though the one class, with the period it belonged to, were
characterized by the errors and anachronisms of its history;
the other by simplicity and accuracy; the one, by books
written under fictitious names; the other, by the power to
distinguish truth from falsehood or by honesty of purpose?
Should the one be a sign of the want of truthfulness and
discernment; the other, of religious simplicity? Can this
aggregation of the Apocrypha over against the Hagiographa,
serve the purpose of a just estimate? Hardly so; for
some of the latter, such as Esther and Ecclesiastes, cannot
be put above Wisdom, 1st Maccabees, Judith, Baruch, or
Ecclesiasticus. The doctrine of immortality, clearly expressed
in the Book of Wisdom, is not in Ecclesiastes;
neither is God once named in the Book of Esther as author
of the marvelous deliverances which the chosen people are
said to have experienced. The history narrated in 1st
Maccabees is more credible than that in Esther. It is therefore
misleading to mark off all the apocryphal works as
<emph>human</emph> and all the canonical ones as <emph>divine</emph>. The divine and
the human elements in man are too intimately blended to
admit of such separation. The best which he produces
partakes of both. The human element still permeates them
as long as God speaks through man; and He neither dictates
nor speaks otherwise. In the attributes claimed for
the canonical books no rigid line can be drawn. It may be
that the inspiration of their authors differed in degree; that
the writer of Ecclesiastes, for example, was more philosophical
than Jesus, son of Sirach; but different degrees of
inspiration belong to the canonical writers themselves.
Undue exaltation of the Hebrew canon does injustice to the
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
wider Alexandrian one. Yet some still speak of <q>the pure
Hebrew canon,</q> identifying it with that of the Church of
England. We admit that history had become legendary,
that it was written in an oratorical style by the Alexandrian
Jews, and was used for didactic purposes as in Tobit and
Judith. Gnomic poetry had survived in the book of Sirach;
prophecy, in Baruch and the Epistle of Jeremiah, though
here the language is already prosaic. Imitation is too observable
in the matter and manner of the Apocrypha. They
have parallels, however, among the Hagiographa, which
originated in an age when the genuine breath of prophetic
inspiration had ceased; when history and prophecy had
degenerated; so that the transition from Esther and Malachi
to Judith and Baruch, as also from Proverbs to Wisdom, is
not great.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>Talmudic</emph> canon is generally adopted at the present
day. It was not, however, universally received even by
the Jews; for Esther was omitted out of it by those from
whom Melito got his catalogue in Palestine; while Sirach
was annexed to it as late as the beginning of the 4th century.
Baruch was also added in several Jewish circles,
doubtless on account of its supposed authorship. Thus
<q>the pure Hebrew canon</q> was not one and the same among
all Jews; and therefore the phrase is misleading. Neither
is it correct to say that it is the only canon distinctly recognized
during the first four centuries, unless the usage of
the early fathers be set over against their <emph>assumed</emph> contrary
judgment; nor can all who followed the Alexandrian canon
be pronounced uncritical, including Origen himself. A
stereotyped canon of the Old Testament, either among Jews
or Christians of the first four centuries, which excluded all
the apocryphal books and included all the canonical ones,
cannot be shown. And in regard to <q>the critical judgment</q>
of Jews and Christians in that period it is arbitrary
to suppose that such as adopted the present canonical
books alone were more discerning than others. They were
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
more traditional and conservative; their discriminating
faculty not corresponding to the degree of their reliance
on the past.
</p>

<p>
The aim of the inquirer should be to find from competent
witnesses&mdash;from contemporaneous or succeeding writers of
trustworthy character&mdash;the authors and ages of the biblical
books. When evidence of this kind is not available as
often happens, the only resource is the internal. The external
evidence in favor of the canon is all but exhausted,
and nothing of importance can be added to it now. Its
strength has been brought out; its weakness has not been
equally exhibited. The problem resolves itself into an examination
of internal characteristics, which may be strong
enough to modify or counterbalance the external. The
latter have had an artificial preponderance in the past;
henceforward they must be regulated by the internal. The
main conclusion should be drawn from the contents of the
books themselves. And the example of Jews and Christians,
to whom we owe the Bible canon, shows that <emph>classification</emph>
is necessary. This is admitted both by Roman
Catholic writers and orthodox Protestants. A gloss-writer
on what is usually called the <q>decree of Gratian,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the
Bolognese canonist of the 12th century, remarks about the
canonical books, <q>all may be received but may not be held
in the same estimation.</q> John Gerhard speaks of a <emph>second
order</emph>, containing the books of the New Testament, about whose authors there
were some doubts in the Church;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Loci Theologici</hi>
Tom. i. pp. 186, 187, ed. Cotta, 1762.</note> and
Quenstedt similarly specifies <emph>proto-canonical</emph> and
<emph>deutero-canonical</emph>
New Testament books, or those of the first and
second order.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Theologia Didactico-polemica</hi>,
p. 340.</note> What are degrees or kinds of inspiration
assumed by many, but a tacit acknowledgment of the fact
that books vary in intrinsic value as they are more or less
impregnated with divine truth or differ in the proportion of
the eternal and temporal elements which commingle in
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
every revealed religion? Doubtless the authors from whom
the separate books proceeded, if discoverable, should be regarded;
the inspiration of an Isaiah is higher than that of
a Malachi, and an apostle is more authoritative than an
evangelist; but the authors are often unknown. Besides,
the process of redaction through which many of the writings
passed, hinders an exact knowledge of authorship.
In these circumstances the books themselves must determine
the position they should occupy in the estimation of those
who are looking at records of the past to help their spiritual
life. And if it be asked, What principle should lie at the
basis of a thorough classification? the answer is, the <emph>normative
element</emph> contained in the sacred books. This is the
characteristic which should regulate classification. The
time when a book appeared, its author, the surrounding
circumstances that influenced him, are of less consequence
than its bearing upon the spiritual education of mankind.
The extent of its adequacy to promote this end determines
the rank. Such books as embody the indestructible essence
of religion with the fewest accidents of time, place and
nature&mdash;which present conditions not easily disengaged
from the imperishable life of the soul, deserve the first
rank. Whatever Scriptures express ideas consonant with
the nature of God as a holy, loving, just and good Being&mdash;as
a benevolent Father not willing the destruction of any
of his children; the Scriptures presenting ideas of Him
consistent with pure reason and man's highest instincts,
besides such as set forth our sense of dependence on the
infinite; the books, in short, that contain a revelation from
God with least admixture of the human conditions under
which it is transmitted&mdash;these belong to the highest class.
If they lead the reader away from opinion to practice,
from dogma to life, from non-doing to obedience to the
law of moral duty, from the notion that everything in salvation
has been done for him to the keeping of the commandments,
from particularist conceptions about the divine
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
mercy to the widest belief of its overshadowing presence&mdash;such
books of Scripture are in that same proportion to be
ranked among the best. In regard to the Old Testament,
conformity to Christ's teaching will determine rank; or,
which is tantamount, conformity to that pure reason which
is God's natural revelation in man; a criterion which assigns
various ranks to such Scriptures as appeared among
a Semite race at a certain stage of its development. In the
New Testament, the words and precepts of Jesus have a
character of their own, though it is very difficult to select
them from the gospels. The supposition that the apostles'
productions possess a higher authority than those of their
disciples, is natural. But the immediate followers of
Christ did not all stand on one platform. Differing from
one another even in important principles, it is possible, if
not certain, that some of their disciples' composition may
be of higher value. The spirit of God may have wrought
within the apostles generally with greater power and
clearness than in other teachers; but its operation is conditioned
not merely by outward factors but by individual
idiosyncrasy; so that one who had not seen the Lord and
was therefore not an apostle proper, may have apprehended
his mind better than an immediate disciple. Paul stood
above the primitive apostles in the extent to which he
fathomed the pregnant sayings of Jesus and developed
their latent germs. Thus the normative element&mdash;that
which determines the varying degrees of authority belonging
to the New Testament&mdash;does not lie in apostolic authorship
but internal worth; in the clearness and power
with which the divine Spirit enabled men to grasp the
truth. By distinguishing the <emph>temporal</emph> and the <emph>eternal</emph>
in christianity, the writings necessarily rise or sink in
proportion to these elements. The <emph>eternal</emph> is the essence
and gem of revealed truth. Perfectibility belongs only
to the <emph>temporal</emph>; it cannot be predicated of the <emph>eternal</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The multitudinous collection of books contained in the
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
Bible is not pervaded by unity of purpose or plan, so as to
make a good classification easy. Least of all is it dominated
by such substantial unity as has been connected with
one man; for the conception of a Messiah was never the
national belief of Judaism, but a notion projected by
prophets into the future to comfort the people in times of
disaster; the forecasting of aspirations doomed to disappointment.
From the collection presenting various degrees
of intellectual and moral development, it is difficult to see
a sufficient reason for some being canonized to the exclusion
of better works which were relegated to the class of
the <emph>apocryphal</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Jones's<note place='foot'>See Jones's new
and full method of settling the canonical authority of the New Testament,
Vol. I., Part i., chap. 5. page 52, ed. 1726.</note> statement that the primitive
Christians are proper judges to determine what book is canonical, requires
great modification, being too vague to be serviceable; for
<q>primitive Christians</q> is a phrase that needs to be defined.
How far do they extend? How much of the first
and second centuries do they cover? Were not the primitive
Christians divided in their beliefs? Did the Jewish
and the Pauline ones unite in accepting the same writings?
Not for a considerable time, until the means of ascertaining
the real authors of the books and the ability to do so
were lacking.
</p>

<p>
As to the Old Testament, the Palestinian Jews determined
the canonical books by gradually contracting the list and
stopping it at a time when their calamities throwing them
back on the past for springs of hope, had stiffened them
within a narrow traditionalism; but their brethren in Egypt,
touched by Alexandrian culture and Greek philosophy,
received later productions into their canon, some of which
at least are of equal value with Palestinian ones. In any
case, the degree of authority attaching to the Biblical
books grew from less to greater, till it culminated in a
divine character, a sacredness rising even to infallibility.
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
Doubtless the Jews of Palestine distinguished the canonical
from the apocryphal or deutero-canonical books on grounds
satisfactory to themselves; but their judgment was not infallible.
A senate of Rabbis under the old dispensation
might err, as easily as a synod of priests under the new.
Though they may have been <emph>generally</emph> correct, it must not
be assumed that they were <emph>always</emph> so. Their discernment
may be commended without being magnified. The general
feeling of leaning upon the past was a sound one, for the
best times of Judaism had departed, and with them the
most original effusions; yet the wave of Platonism that
passed over Alexandria could not but quicken even the
conservative mind of the Jew. Greek thought blended
with echoes of the past, though in dulled form. Still a
line had to be drawn in the national literature; and it was
well drawn on the whole. The feeling existed that the
collection must be closed with works of a certain period
and a certain character; and it was closed accordingly,
without preventing individuals from putting their private
opinions over against authority, and dissenting.
</p>

<p>
At the present day a new arrangement is necessary; but
where is the ecclesiastical body bold enough to undertake
it? And if it were attempted or carried out by non-ecclesiastical
parties, would the churches approve or adopt
the proceeding? We venture to say, that if some books be
separated from the collection and others put in their place&mdash;if
the classification of some be altered, and their authority
raised or lowered&mdash;good will be done; the Bible will
have a fairer degree of normal power in doctrine and
morals, and continue to promote spiritual life. Faith in
Christ precedes faith in books. Unless criticism be needlessly
negative it cannot remove this time-honored legacy
from the position it is entitled to, else the spiritual consciousness
of humanity will rebel. While the subject is
treated reverently, and the love of truth overrides dogmatic
prejudices, the canon will come forth in a different form
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
from that which it has had for centuries&mdash;a form on which
faith may rest without misgiving.
</p>

<p>
The canon was a work of divine providence, because
history, in a religious view, necessarily implies the fact.
It was a work of inspiration, because the agency of the
Holy Spirit has always been with the people of God as a
principle influencing their life. It was not, however, the
result of a <emph>special</emph> or <emph>peculiar</emph> act of divine inspiration at any
one time, but of a gradual illuminating process, shaped by
influences more or less active in the divine economy.
</p>

<p>
The canonical authority of Scripture does not depend on
any church or council. The early church may be cited as
a <emph>witness</emph> for it; that is all. Canonical authority lies in
Scripture itself, and is inherent in the books so far as they
contain a declaration of the divine will. Hence, there is
truth in the statement of old theologians that the authority
of Scripture is from God alone. It was the early church
indeed that made the canon, selecting the books which appeared
to have been written by apostles or apostolic men,
and carrying over to them authority from alleged authenticity
more than internal value. But the latter is the real
index of authority; and God is the fountain from whom
spiritual endowments proceed.<note place='foot'>Ecclesia
sua autoritate nullum librum facit canonicum, quippe canonica
scripturae autoritas est a solo Deo, &amp;c. Gerhard's
<hi rend='italic'>Loci Theologici</hi>,
tom. i. p. 4, ed. Cotta. Autoritas scripturæ quoad nos nihil
allud est, quam manifestatio et cognitio unicæ illius divinæ et summæ
autoritatis, quæ scriptum est interna et insita. Ecclesia igitur non
confert scripturæ novam aliquam autoritatem quoad nos, sed testificatione
sua ad agnitionem illius; veritatis nos deducit. Concedimus,
ecclesiam esse scripturæ sacræ <emph>testem, custodem, vindicem, praeconem,
et interpretem</emph>; sed negarnus, ex eo effici, quod autoritas scripturæ
sive simpliciter sive quoad nos ab ecclesia pendeat et quidem unice,
pendeat.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, tomus secundus, p. 39, ed. Cotta.</note>
The <emph>canonicity</emph> of the books
is a distinct question from that of their <emph>authenticity</emph>. The
latter is a thing of historic criticism; the former of doctrinal
belief. Their ecclesiastical authority rests on outward
attestation; their normal, on faith and feeling.
</p>
</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
